 Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Alder Creek Management Program Teamlet Revised Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2010 ~ 9:00 am - 12:00 pm PSE Skagit Room Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Ira McDaniel (PSE); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe) by phone; Brock Applegate (WDFW), and Joetta Zablotney (R2). NEXT TRIG MEETING: April 1, 2010 NEXT ELK TEAMLET MEETING: March 18, 2010 ACTION ITEMS  All - Bring examples of similar plans for other projects to use as a guide for completing our implementation plan  Joetta - Update orthophotos with polygons based on survey data  Joetta and Kim - Enter Alder Creek into project boundary and submit new FERC drawing  Joetta- Obtain most recent (2009) orthos  Joetta - Publish orthophotos with polygons to PDF  Joetta - Make mapping and metadata available to the TRIG  Ira- Send to Joetta Alder Creek road easement data to add to the GIS base map for the property LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE: Alder Creek: The signed road easement was sent to DNR with payment. We are waiting for DNR executive approval. Not expecting any issues or changes. Alternative Properties: Property Z was recently purchased by DNR. No update on Property T. Chris D. asked about other properties near or adjacent to the Alder Creek property. Portions of property Z are nearby, approx. ¼ mile downstream, however, these are no longer available. POST ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/24/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call The teamlet discussed the process and next steps for developing the management program. Using the initial surveys and existing data available, we will create an improved base map using GIS to show cover types, habitat features, and buffers to help define management tracts. Existing Data Sets:  Pre-acquisition surveys (drawing, wetland rating, weed list)  Property survey results and drawing  Most current orthos  USGS DEM’s (gross look at topo), and maybe LIDAR (Skagit County)  WDFW PHS data  DNR timber management typing maps  Timber cruise info from Mark Hitchcock (field notes, report results)  County sensitive areas  Critical habitat for Northern Spotted Owls including the Finney Block Spotted Owl Special Emphasis Area (SOSEA)  Photos of property (aerials from helicopter, ground photos of wetlands, etc.)  Brock suggested including wetland buffer in western parcel  Chris suggested 2009 satellite images could be useful  Tony pointed out that we could obtain low elevation high resolution imagery through photo flights for lands we manage. Other Relevant License Articles, Management Plans, and Agreements:  The 503 Elk Plan references SA 508, SA 511, SA 502, SA 504, SA 509, LA 20, and LA 410 Agreements:  Fund Allocation  Wetland buffer  Weed management (in management plan) Development of Management Tracts and Prescriptions: Purpose - to protect and enhance habitat for elk, wetlands, and deciduous forest for migratory birds. Management areas (Tracts) – an area to manage for a specific purpose (this could be preservation or active management). There could be multiple goals in same tract. Brock suggested that Lewis River Hydro Projects Wildlife Habitat Management Plan may be a good example. Prescriptions are what we want to do, when we want to do it, and how we want to do it for each tract. May include SOP’s. How we decide to manage different areas- use objectives as a starting point. Prescriptions may include: Elk forage type (permanent, after clearcut (forest management), reseed old road, etc.)  Identify forage areas and type  Identify parameters and methods BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/24/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  Permitting Wetlands  Rating system  Buffers  Jurisdictional aspect for eastern parcel Deciduous Forest  Bigger buffer than required? Buffer size consistent with agreement.  Cottonwood plantings Management tract boundaries to be determined by TRIG. Ground disturbing activities require cultural review. Other topics discussed:  Polygon 12/14 – Weeds? Re-veg? Jurisdictional wetland boundaries? o Wetland determination needed in eastern parcel (Objective look at soils, determine boundaries, legal aspects, TRIG objectives for polygon) o Forage – RMEF had suggested equipment to turn over soil o Mowing o Refer to the Elk Plan, section 6.6.1 Elk Forage Species  Access and gates, hunting information.  Management of stream crossings.  ESA, Migratory Bird Treaty Act nest data, PHS data, etc.  Vegetation screening from the road.  Brock suggested looking at opportunities for forage in other areas as well, and improving deciduous forest habitat.  Chris D expressed reservations about forage objectives in polygon 11 due to steep loose ground. He also suggested we need to determine wetland boundaries and management using methods that support our goals (may be different for forest practices vs. mowing, grading, etc).  Monitoring will be funded by SA 514 (Need to determine methods once objectives are established). Management Program Document Format: This will be the local implementation document, a “living document.” Tony will develop the format with Marty and Andy Hunting (PSE’s technical writer). We plan to have an outline for the next meeting in March. FOR THE NEXT MEETING – MARCH 18 (time and location TBD)  Management Program Implementation Document Outline  Update from Joetta on base map status BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/24/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/24/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4  