 Draft Meeting Notes April 11, 2013 / 9 a.m. – 2 p.m. / Burlington Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Team Leader: Scott Heller (PSE) 425-457-5578, 206-437-6042 (cell) scott.heller@pse.com PRESENT Shauna Hee (USFS), Scott Heller (PSE), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Haley Edwards (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental) 1. Welcome, introductions, safety minute, review agenda. 9:00 – 9:10 2. Channel Creek revegetation plan review, (if necessary). 9:10 – 9:30 3. 2013 Noxious Weed Treatments 9:30 – 10:00 4. 2013 Reed Canarygrass treatments, monitoring, surveys, review and discussion 10:00 – 11:00 5. Break 11:00 – 11:15 6. Noxious Weeds Habitat Management Plan document discussion (2014-2018) 11:15 – 12:15 7. Lunch Break 12:15-12:45 8. Plants of Special Status Habitat Management Program document- Review updates 12:45 – 1:30 9. 2013 Carex flava census discussion 1:30 – 1:50 10. Evaluate meeting, need for another meeting in 2013? 1:50 – 2:00 New Action Items:  Scott will keep Shauna informed with photos and other site data related to the Sulphur Creek slide area and any proposed restoration actions. A revegetation plan will likely need to be developed for the site.  Scott will map and compile information on the herb Robert (Geranium robertianum) weed sites with the highest treatment priority ranks. This information will be reviewed by interested members of the teamlet to develop a more detailed strategy and schedule for treatment. Due to the widespread nature of the weed, the group agreed to address the most isolated, small patches, and/or those most threatening to native plant communities, close to wetlands, as the highest priority.  Scott will send out possible dates for a spring site visit to wetlands WB-17, WB-30, WB-20 and WB-21. Reed canarygrass treatments and monitoring both past and future will be discussed and field reviewed.  Scott will add to the monitoring schedule section of the Noxious Weed HMP information on the area treated and efficacy of treatment as noted during monitoring. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Page 1 of 3  Shauna asked that the group be aware of a historical sighting of the Special Status species jewelweed (Impatiens noli-tangere).  Scott will discuss with the Carex Working Group the utility of the data collected in the 0.5m circular plots around each Carex flava plant. Specifically, they will be asked to address how the data can be used to determine PHAR density, given the high degree of overlap in the plots; and whether a subsampling method might give useful data with lower cost.  Scott will provide Shauna with copies of the EO forms for the new PLOR4 population at WB- 18; Shauna will provide an NRIS Site ID number. Ongoing Action Items:  Scott will have Joetta Zablotney at R2 send Shauna a GIS shapefile of the current noxious weed ‘Plan Area’ boundary. Safety Moment Slips trips, and falls were discussed. They are one of the most frequently reported injuries and most could have been prevented. Preventative measures while travelling off trail for fieldwork include taking your time, not carrying too many things, wearing proper footwear, and looking out for uneven terrain, rotten/slippery logs, brush, and mud. Channel Creek Revegetation Plan Scott reviewed the current revegetation plan for the spawning beach decommissioning sites. He confirmed that Shauna’s comments had been incorporated into the design plans, and the application of topsoil at the site was discussed. Sulphur Creek Slide Area A landslide along Sulphur Creek just downstream of the Baker Lake Highway is under review for corrective action to protect the road. Shauna would like to be kept in the loop regarding proposed actions and revegetation. Scott mentioned the site is very steep and landslides have occurred previously in the same location. The group also discussed hazard tree removal, and small trees vs. larger overstory trees along the top of the slide. SA 508 Noxious Weeds- 2013 Treatments Scott provided a table summarizing noxious weed work completed through 2012. Sites currently being treated and/or monitored, eradicated sites, and sites that have been visited and mapped only with no treatment yet were reviewed. Table 4 in the Noxious Weeds HMP was also reviewed. It is a 5-year treatment schedule (2009-2013). Forecasted versus actual treatments were discussed because the 5-year treatment schedule was created prior to 2009, and the forecasted number of sites to treat by year is not what actually occurred. More sites were treated than originally forecasted. The next five-year treatment schedule (2014- 2018) should be much more accurate. This formed the basis for discussion of anticipated treatment activity for 2013, which will focus on weed sites on NFS lands, particularly Canada thistle and bull thistle. Herb Robert sites are numerous and widespread, and Scott will provide additional information on size and location to help prioritize these sites for treatment. One small population of yellow hawkweed (Hieracium caespitosum) near Glover Mt. will be monitored this year and retreated as needed. At the Alder Creek property, treatment of wild chervil (Anthriscus sylvestris) will begin this year. A small population of orange hawkweed (Hieracium aurantiacum) at Alder Creek was hand pulled in early April, this site will continue to be monitored. Reed Canarygrass – 2013 Treatments Treatment and monitoring of the reed canarygrass wetlands was discussed. A field trip will be planned for this spring to provide Shauna an opportunity to visit wetlands WB-17 and WB-30, to see the treatment, monitoring, and planting work that has been accomplished. Wetlands WB-20 and WB-21 would also be visited to begin to determine treatment/monitoring work at those sites. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 DRAFT 4/11/13 Notes, Page 2 of 3 Noxious Weed HMP Review The Noxious Weed HMP will be updated for the next five-year implementation period, 2014-2018. Species- specific plans will not likely change much, but the treatment schedule will be updated. The group discussed the areas to be resurveyed (referred to in the SA 508 Noxious Weed Plan ‘designated portions of the Plan Area’), and discussed the current boundaries of the ‘Plan Area’. Also discussed was the (Baker) Project area and the 2003 Relicensing Survey areas. The group tentatively agreed that it might make sense for the resurvey to focus on lower priority weed sites that have not been visited/mapped/treated since license issuance. Shauna requested that the treatment summary/monitoring schedule display ‘area treated’ and ‘efficacy of treatment’ for each site. She also noted that the FS is placing greater emphasis on managing non-natives as part of habitat restoration. Plants of Special Status HMP Review The Plants of Special Status HMP was updated in March 2013 (in advance of the 5-year required update) due to numerous changes in species status, updated site information (many pictures added), and detection of new sites. The document was reviewed and will next be presented to the TRIG for approval. The Platanthera orbiculata site at Sandy Creek was monitored in 2012; no plants were observed. This concludes the required monitoring for the site, and the management plan will be discontinued as previously agreed. During 2011, all sites were monitored on NFS lands. This was the 5-year monitoring year for nearly all the PSS sites; 2016 will be the next round of 5-year monitoring. The Peltigera pacifica site was not monitored in 2012 due to an early snowfall; this site will be checked in 2013. An NRIS Site ID is needed for the new Platanthera orbiculata site near WB-18; Scott will provide the EO to Shauna and she will assign a Site ID. Carex flava Census - 2013 The Carex Working Group has expressed interest in conducting the census this year in late July or early August. A discussion of Phalaris arundinacea density plots around the Carex flava plants occurred. Given the high degree of overlap when counting P. arundinacea stems in the plots, a subsampling method might give more useful data with lower cost. Scott will ask them to review the utility of the 0.5m plots around each plant and to consider alternative subsampling methods. Otherwise, the census will follow the established protocol. Canada and bull thistle have been noted at the site; Scott will ask the Carex Working Group to map any populations within the Carex flava site during the census. Next Meeting The date for the next Botanical Teamlet meeting was left open. It was agreed that a meeting once per year, prior to the field season, is desirable. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 DRAFT 4/11/13 Notes, Page 3 of 3  