 Update Notes June 21, 2011 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group TRIG Update for June 2011 Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com DECISION: None TRIG MEETINGS: The next TRIG meeting will be in-person August 4th in Bothell. Tony will convene a teamlet in July to draft a plan of 1st year activities for Burpee Hill Property. ACTION ITEMS  All Volunteer to be part of Burpee Hill Property teamlet  Tony Convene a teamlet in July to identify “Year One” activities at Property X, report at 8/4 mtg  Haley Re- email TRIG a proposal re: snag creation for TRIG to review & provide feedback; move forward with activities unless a TRIGger asks for additional review / discussion at 8/4 mtg  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Email TRIG a proposal re: Alder Crk brush mgmt for TRIG to review & provide feedback; move forward with activities unless a TRIGger asks for add’l review / discussion at 8/4 mtg  Jamie Bring peanut butter pie to the August TRIG meeting  Tony Coordinate location (Bothell please?) for August 4 TRIG meeting  Haley Email Loon Platform photos to the TRIG  Stan Talk with your constituents re: Property B and Tribal access on acquired lands  Kim/Greta Update TRIG re: accounting process for Late Seral Forest money and TERF fund  Tony, Haley, Scott Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514, develop a draft plan for TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest) In lieu of a June TRIG meeting we decided to have PSE provide an update on "what's going on" with the Baker terrestrial work. LAND ACQUISITION Breaking news: We have purchased the Seefeld property! The property, formerly called Property X, closed today, so we now own another 405 acres that we will use for elk forage, wetlands and deciduous forest, snags and more. The property was purchased within the TRIG authorized $1.2M. Below is a list of items that came from the negotiations and due diligence work:  In relation to property encroachments, Seefeld was able to obtain 6 of the 8 limited use permits. One owner was unresponsive (there is a shed behind their lot that encroaches 5' into the Seefeld property- -that shed may actually be owned by the next neighbor to the South, who has signed a permit), and one owner declined signing (they are one of the owners along the cleared area with a couple fruit trees-- the other 4 owners backing along it have signed up). Given the low risk involved we have moved forward without having these 2 permits signed.  In order to secure access to the property near Vogler Lake, PSE needed to secure easement from the owner near Vogler Lake. To make a long (and difficult) story short, the best option was to secure BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Page 1 of 3 easement on the existing access road from Mr. Hayes (which we have done), and to also secure an easement from Mr. Hayes for development of a new access road that will be construction to go around the WDFW access (which we have also acquired). If you want the details, call either Tony or Ira.  The new access road will need to be designed and constructed this fall, as part of the costs of acquisition negations authorized by the TRIG. We plan to construct the new access under a Forest Practices permit, and we will be conducting a planning field trip at the property on June 22nd. We are estimating that the cost of constructing the new road will be relatively small, and we will present the proposed cost at the next meeting.  Total costs for the acquisition, including property assessment and the closing costs, will be presented in the next quarterly budget update from Will.  We plan to call the new property the "Burpee Hill Property," that is, unless someone comes up with a better name (we decided against calling it "Vogler Lake Property"). Thanks to Ira for his great work (and persistence!) in securing this property for the Baker Project! Now that we own it, we need to decided what types of data, studies, and planning will need to be done within the first year of acquisition (in keeping with our management plan requirements). I am proposing that we convene a Burpee Hill Property teamlet during the week of July 11th. It will likely be a 4-5 hour meeting. Please let me know by Monday, June 27th, if you would like to participate and which day(s) you would be available. POST-ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES, ALDER CREEK DNR Application Update: Tony, Marty and Joetta have been working to finalize the mapping of roads, sensitive areas, and buffers for the Alder Creek Long Term Application. Part 1 of the application will be ready to go the DNR at the end of June. We are beginning to develop Part 2, which includes activities proposed to be conducted during the next 15 years at Alder Creek. We hope to complete Part 2 by the end of the summer so that the entire package will be with the DNR and they can hopefully issue permits in the fall. Legacy Wood: The Legacy Wood proposal is being updated and Haley we will be sending it out again soon, hopefully for approval. Brush cutting: Tony, together with the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, is organizing a volunteer day for the RMEF Skagit Valley chapter to go out to the Alder Creek property and do some blackberry cutting and weed whacking. The date has been set for Saturday, June 25th. Tony will let you know how that went during the July update to the TRIG. It should be a fun time! BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE: Scott has had some follow up Reed Canary Grass treatment done since the last meeting. He and Kathy visited the RCG sites, scotch broom, and rare fern sites again to monitor their condition. Scott has also sent out the Plants of Special Status management plan for review on June 7th. Please review and send any comments/edits you may have to Scott by July 7th. We can then make final edits and get approval of the document as "final" at the August TRIG meeting. Planning for the Carex flava population census is still underway and the surveys will take place mid-summer. OSPREY / LOON UPDATE: An Osprey nest survey was conducted last week on the reservoirs. Three active osprey nests were observed on Lake Shannon and one on Baker Lake. The helicopter flight to survey for productivity for both osprey and bald eagle nesting will be flown on June 29th. Twice monthly loon surveys are continuing through July and Haley will provide an update for the August TRIG meeting. BALD EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY UPDATE: Haley sent out the eagle night roost survey monitoring report. Any comments can be made to the upcoming annual report that will be sent out next month. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 June Update, Page 2 of 3 Draft August 4 Agenda – Bothell, with Web-X, Call  Agenda, Notes, A.I.  BRCC / License Updates  Land Acquisition Updates  Post-Acquisition Updates o Alder Creek DNR Application o Seefeld/Burpee Hill Property Acquisition Celebration! o Burpee Hill “Year One Teamlet” recommendations  Access Management  Botanical Update – Approval of the Plants of Special Status Management Plan  Loon / Osprey Update BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 June Update, Page 3 of 3  