 Final RRG Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 / 9:30 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 9:30 am - 12:00 pm PSE Skagit Service Center 1600 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland and Cary Feldmann, by phone (PSE); Ann Dunphy, Jon Vanderheyden, and Carol Gladsjo (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Sergio Capozzi, by phone (AECOM), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) 2010 RRG MEETING DATES April 20, June 15, Aug. 17, Oct. 19, Dec. 21 from 9:30 – 2:30. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEXT LEP MEETING No date has been set. Pam will send out notification depending on the outcome of the funding discussions set to occur on February 26, 2010. NEW ACTION ITEMS  Ann – Send updated design narrative to Sergio for Sergio to insert into Section 10 of the Resort Implementation Plan.  Pam – Send out notification of Teamlet meetings with Ann re the Water Safety Plan so others can join.  Pam – Coordinate with Tony, Arnie, and Elizabeth re. their implementation plans and impact on aesthetics. They all need to tie actions back to the Aesthetics Plan.  Cary – Consider the best approach to flag the need to do an aesthetics visual assessment plan and bring suggested approach to the next meeting.  Ann – Send out revised version of USFS funding list that addressed discussion from today.  Pam – Send out list of priorities (and supporting data where it exists) for funding for all to flesh out to the extent possible and use as a basis for funding discussions / decisions.  Pam – Change Title of November 30, 2009 LEP Meeting to “Baker Law Enforcement Plan Teamlet Meeting” to make clear that this was not a full LEP meeting. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 Page 1 of 4 PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Pam will continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) – ongoing. APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft December 15, 2009 RRG and LEP meeting notes without edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that they are moving BRCC meetings to a semi-annual schedule. Members are reserving the 4th Wednesday of each month for a conference call (from 9:00 – 11:00). When BRCC members agree that a conference call is not needed, PSE will email an update of what is happening in each of the resource groups. Per Article 601 a 10 day notice will be provided to call a meeting. They anticipate the next in- person meeting to occur April 28 or May 26. RECREATION PLAN UPDATES Baker Lake Resort Plan / Implementation Plan, SA 303 Sergio reminded all that this Implementation plan was written as if none of the implementation actions had started. Currently the BLRP (management plan) has been submitted to FERC and we are awaiting their approval. At the last meeting we looked at a preliminary draft of this plan. The Implementation Procedures (Section 6) of the document has been further populated in this updated version. In order to limit appendices and attachments to this plan we added a section (10) for supplementary documents / materials. Sergio emphasized that this will be the primary document that drives the on-the-ground implementation actions. Any actions that are completed toward decommissioning the site and the site redevelopment would be captured in the annual reporting process. This will remain an informal review document until we hear from FERC about the approval of the Management Plan. Water Safety Plan, SA 304 Pam was pleased to report that this plan has been approved by FERC with no changes. In the plan it is clear where the PSE and USFS responsibilities lie. We need to decide what should go on the tear sheet maps. There are also boating specifics that need to be put on those maps including boater / swimmer interactions. All were asked to let Pam know if they want copies of the FERC Order approving this plan. The implementation plan and reservoir hazard monitoring plan should be complete by the end of 2010. The bulletin boards and tear sheet maps need to be completed this year. PSE and the USFS will work together on this with Sergio’s assistance. Within 3 years from license issuance PSE is to construct floating log booms or buoys to delineate swimming areas from boating areas. Pam and Ann will be meeting periodically on these tasks and then reporting back to this group for review and approval. Aesthetics Management Plan, SA 302 The new version of this plan acknowledged better coordination with these groups around any potential aesthetic actions to ensure consistency across these resource areas (ARG, CRAG, and TRIG). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 Page 2 of 4 PSE is to prepare a Visual and Aesthetic Enhancement Implementation Plan for any actions that may result in significant changes to the visual environment of the Project Area. Pam will continue to communicate this to the PMs so they are aware that this needs to be included at the design level of their planning activities. We reviewed the visual enhancements called out in the plan for West Pass Dike, Upper Baker Operations and Maintenance Yards, Lower Baker Dam Crane, and Lower Baker River Operations Complex. Ann indicated that the USFS has an interest in the Lower Baker features. PSE is considering developing a handbook that covers what is in Section 8 of the plan. This could be used as a reference guide for any aesthetics action for the term of the license. This would be the first implementation action and would influence future actions. Timeline: This plan needs to be sent to FERC by October 1. It will be out for formal review the end of March. Lower Baker Developed Recreation, SA 305 Pan reported that she is working with the Floating Surface Collector (aquatic) folks on this. They are considering doing construction for the Lower Baker FSC at the Lake Shannon boat launch. She will continue to coordinate efforts around this Law Enforcement Plan, SA 318 Review of this plan was deferred to the LEP meeting (immediately following this meeting). Recreation Management Report, SA 301 Sergio has been working on creating a template to show the format for the annual report. We will provide feedback on this at the April meeting. The first reporting date to FERC is April 30, 2011. REQUEST FOR FUNDING We discussed the following questions that were placed on the agenda for an official vote / decision: Shall the Recreation Resource Group (RRG) allocate the 2009 RAM Funds, $50,000 (2006 dollars) to the USDA-FS for the Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment? Shall the RRG allocate $20K of the $50K (2006 dollars) RAM Funds to Whatcom Co. Sheriff’s Office for the purchase of equipment listed in proposal dated 12/10/09 requested by Deputy Jeff Turner? Article 602: RAM fund may be used for actions to address recreation management resource needs. Jon explained that the USFS has a co-op agreement with Whatcom County which could provide the funding they are looking for, removing the necessity to request funding through the Baker license process. Jeff indicated that he was advised that the County could not have equipment provided by others in their vehicles.. There is currently $73K designated to go to the USFS. There is an additional $22K annually of PSE funding to support the LE article that becomes available when the plan is developed ($44K from 2009 and 2010 . Jon brought up a concern that the RAM fund was established “for actions to address recreation Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 Page 3 of 4 management resource needs” (SA pg 141) and does not appear to include LE needs as the article is written. The money in article 303 supports the FS implementation of the article to redevelop the resort into a campground as provided for in the BLRP... Ann stated that with the other funding request for 2010 RAM funds being considered for vote we would put our request for $50K the 2010 RAM funds back on the table for vote (a total of $100k). Cary suggested that we should know that 303 was fulfilled and complete before discussing the disposition of the RAM funds. He also requested from the USFS a list of additional features (the “add-on” items that are over and above the initial funding) that would be made available through RAM funding. Jon agreed to send to send a more clear proposal to Cary, and if they reach agreement, the USFS agreed to send it out for RRG review. Ann explained that this request was to allow the USFS to complete the resort redevelopment as planned in the BLRP, including accessibility requirements that were not initially known. She agreed to send something out that defines what the USFS would do with and without this additional funding so members have a better idea of how the funds would be spent before making a decision on this request. Pam will set up a conference call on February 26 to address the funding questions. Our aim is to make this decision prior to our next meeting. NEXT RRG MEETING AGENDA TOPICS  BRCC Update  Funding Issues  Plan Review  Cross Resource Issues  Review Recreation Implementation Schedule  Discuss Form and Method for Annual Reporting – SA 301  Other Updates?  Set April 20 Meeting Agenda for RRG (9:30 – 10:30)  Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS  December 15, 2009 Notes from RRG and Law Enforcement Meetings  November 30, 2009 Notes from Law Enforcement Meeting (final) with edits  February 16, 2010 Agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 Page 4 of 4  