 Final Meeting Notes November 8, 2012 /9 a.m. – 11 a.m. / Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Conference Call Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Ira McDaniel (PSE); Bill Richardson (RMEF); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Theresa Mathis (USFS); and Stan Walsh (SRSC), all by phone and WebEx. DECISION TODAY: None 1. Decision Item #1: TRIG MEETINGS: Nov. 8, 2012 Conference Call, then December 6th regular TRIG meeting ACTION ITEMS  Tony: Develop decision for property purchase, to be on the agenda for a December meeting decision LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira gave an update on land appraisal and timber valuation for the parcels that we are hoping to add to our portfolio of acquired lands. The parcels, collectively known as the Burpee Hill addition (addition), together are approximately 178 acres. Ira presented the appraiser’s range of land and timber values, which together suggested an appraised value for the “addition” of X dollars (call Tony if you want to know the actual numbers, and other confidential information related to the parcels). Ira also presented some options for the construction of new access roads for providing reliable access to the new parcels and potentially the rest of the Burpee Hill property. TRIG Discussion: Several members wanted more information on the properties. Brock and Stan were interested in reviewing the pre-acquisition survey information and maps a little closer, and together with Theresa requested copies to be e-mailed to them. Stan wanted to discuss the details of the property further with his decision makers before coming back to the TRIG with their recommendation. Theresa was interested in knowing how we would be managing these lands to meet the needs of our settlement articles and management plans. Tony explained how the new addition would be managed primarily for development of elk forage, and that several of the wetlands were good (and one excellent) for breeding amphibians. Brock and Stan also had some questions related to public/tribal access and access restrictions for ATV’s and other vehicles. Bill thought that the property could be managed to provide for good elk foraging habitat. The group agreed that we will put together a decision for a two-week notice related to the purchase of the addition. We developed a list of details that will make up the body of the decision, which include:  Authorizing PSE’s Real Estate Agent to negotiate for the purchase of the additional properties for a purchase price not to exceed $X (Actual amount will be in the decision notice. Ask Tony for details). BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 11/8/12 Notes, Page 1 of 2  Funding would come primarily from the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding, with $25,000 coming from the SA 504 Wetland Habitat acquisition funding to support the purchase of wetlands on the parcels  New access road(s) will need to be constructed to provide access to a couple of the parcels, and will be funded from the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition fund for an estimated amount not to exceed $60,000 (additional road funding beyond this will need to be authorized by additional TRIG agreement). The decision notice will be sent out as line items in the upcoming TRIG meeting agenda for the December 6th meeting. POST-ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES UPDATE Tony detailed the development of the Burpee Hill Step 1 Long-Term FPA application that PSE is developing. Survey information collected earlier this year for the property has been summarized and inserted into the Step 1 application form and tables. Activity maps for roads, slopes, wetlands, streams, and buffers have been developed, and the Step 1 application is almost complete. Tony reported that the application will likely be sent in to the DNR mid-December and that the Step 2 application will be developed over the winter months and likely submitted to the DNR in the spring. Alder Creek timber clearing and pasture rehabilitation is well underway. Harvestable trees have been logged and are ready for trucking to the Sierra Pacific mill on Highway 20, the small conifer trees in the pasture areas have been removed and piled for burning, and on Friday (11/9) the harvest unit will be seeded with our forage seed mix. Pasture areas are currently being scarified and will receive a temporary erosion control seed mix on the following week (likely on 11/13), with the anticipation that the pastures will be disced and then seeded with our forage seed mix in the spring. Legacy wood trees were flagged and saved from harvest, with plans to create snags out of them in future years. Meeting Evaluation:  Good dialogue, participation  Nice to have WebEx Draft December 6 Agenda  Land acquisition decision  Alder Creek program document update decision  Land acquisition and post-acquisition activity updates  Several updates from various management articles BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 11/8/12 Notes, Page 2 of 2  