 Final Meeting Notes December 6, 2012 / 9 a.m. – 2 p.m. / Burlington, Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Scott Heller, Haley Edwards (PSE); Ira McDaniel by phone (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Theresa Mathis (USFS); Brock Applegate by phone (WDFW); Bill Richardson and Bob Nelson by phone (RMEF); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS TODAY Decision #1: Does the TRIG agree to adopt the November 2012 version of the Updated Management Program for the Alder Creek Property document, with approved edits (if any) as our currently-approved working document? Decision #2, as published in the agenda (subsequently amended, see below): Does the TRIG authorize PSE to proceed to negotiate and make an offer to acquire the Burpee Hill addition for an amount not to exceed $400,000, with funding for the purchase coming partly from the SA 504 Wetland Habitat acquisition funding ($25,000), and the remainder from the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding? Decision #3, as published in the agenda (subsequently amended, see below): Upon purchase of the Burpee Hill addition, does the TRIG authorize the use of up to $60,000 of the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding to be used to construct access roads so as to provide permanent access to the new properties? 2013 TRIG MEETINGS Quarterly - March 7, June 6, Sept. 5 and Dec. 5 – with conference calls to be scheduled as needed. ACTION ITEMS  Tony Send out updated TRIG representative list; attach the new USFS org chart  All Please check that your organization’s contact info is correct on the TRIG rep list  Haley Confirm that the 502/514 Survey Report was emailed to the full TRIG  Haley Coordinate site visit for loon platform site consideration; include Brock and Theresa PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Lou Ellyn – Ask Deanna L. to weigh in on suitable habitat for the possible reintroduction of Oregon spotted frogs on acquired lands (on hold to address after USFWS listing decision in fall 2012)  Tony Create a draft prioritization and schedule for the projects on the Alder Creek DNR LTA road plan for the TRIG’s review and consideration  Tony, Haley, Scott – Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514, develop draft plan for the TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest)  Stan – Coordinate meeting between PSE and the Tribes re: access on acquired lands (still in the works) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 12/6/12 Notes, Page 1 of 5 Update on previous action items: Tony noted that the prioritization and schedule of work outlined in the Alder Creek DNR LTA is addressed in the annual work plans. The TRIG’s 2013 plans are still up in the air due to the possible new acquisition (if the acquisition goes through, early post-acquisition work may need to take precedence over some of the management work on existing parcels). Tony also reported that a preliminary draft of the SA 514 Effectiveness Monitoring Implementation Procedures will be out soon, and that a final version is due October 1, 2013. SAFETY MINUTE Tony emphasized the value and importance of wearing safety gear, including hard hat at all construction sites. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE 2013 TRIG Meeting Dates: All resource groups are transitioning to quarterly meetings. TRIG reviewed the calendar and decided upon the following meeting dates: March 7, June 6, Sept. 5 and Dec. 5. The group talked about reserving additional dates for possible conference calls, but decided against that because those “backup” dates are hard to hold in busy calendars. The group agreed that when there are priority issues, they can make “as needed” conference calls or meetings work. USFS Staffing Changes: Theresa reported that Jon V. will be retiring January 3. Lauren Everest will cover Jon’s responsibilities until his position is refilled. TRIG Budget Update: Tony walked the group through the spreadsheet of TRIG-related article fund balances, which has been updated through October 2012. Operating Budget Balances  Article 502 Forest: $5,289  Article 503 Elk: $27,426 … a $25-28k bill remains outstanding for recent Alder Creek work  Article 504 Wetland: $4,960  Article 508 Reed Canary Grass: $55,645  Article 511 Legacy Wood: $54,629  Article 514 Evaluation: $9,300  TERF has $8,171.94, refunded from the SA 515 Late Seral Forest, Forest Service funds Capital Budget Balances Tony noted that these funds have been reconciled to reflect Forest and Wetland repayments to the Elk fund. The following amounts are what remain in the accounts now that the repayments have been made:  Article 502 Forest: $154,240  Article 503 Elk: $1,056,921  Article 504 Wetlands: $67,190 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 12/6/12 Notes, Page 2 of 5 BOTANICAL TEAMLET Scott updated the group on the Botanical Teamlet’s work since the last TRIG meeting. The SA 508 Noxious Weed Habitat Management Procedures document is nearly ready for distribution and comments. He noted that this is one of our “Living Documents” that the TRIG can update as needed over the term of the license, with a scheduled review every five years. He walked the group through a high-level review of the current draft and answered questions. He noted that we don’t have any Class A weeds, but do have a couple Class B designates, which we treat more aggressively than Class C weeds due to specifics within the license agreement. Stan asked if the county noxious weed boards have expressed interest in our work lately. Scott replied that he includes them whenever he works on noxious weed issues and they provide valuable input, so they are involved even though they are not signatories to this process. Theresa asked about the site review cycle; Scott noted that the Noxious Weed Plan includes a schedule overview and the annual reports give additional detail about actual activities. Scott will put the document onto the TRIG’s FTP site and will send an email to the group with instructions for accessing and responding. He will give more than 30 days in the review cycle to accommodate the holidays and will set a timeline in the email. He will then compile the comments, update the document, and schedule the document for an approval decision, probably early spring. Scott also shared photos from the Monday, Dec. 3, field visit to note vegetation, conduct an initial site survey, and consider treatment options for Reed Canary Grass sites at WB-20 and 21. LOON UPDATE Haley updated the group on her work with a Baker engineer to review the possible relocation sites for the Lake Shannon platform. Based on Brock’s concern about lack of available fish near the dam site (inside the guide nets), the site near Bear Creek on the west side of Lake Shannon is the current front-runner. She suggests a site visit to conduct a final evaluation of nearby brood habitat before TRIG finalizes the location. Haley will check with the engineer and coordinate with Brock and Theresa for a site visit. If Brock isn’t available, Haley will move forward with the engineer and keep TRIG informed. ACQUISITION UPDATE Tony briefly reviewed highlights from the November conference call, which was primarily focused on the potential acquisition up for decision today. Ira updated the group on the final appraisal and his thinking about that new information. Details of acquisition activities are not included in public notes, so if you have questions, please call Tony or Ira. Decision #2, as published in the agenda: Does the TRIG authorize PSE to proceed to negotiate and make an offer to acquire the Burpee Hill addition for an amount not to exceed $400,000, with funding for the purchase coming partly from the SA 504 Wetland Habitat acquisition funding ($25,000), and the remainder from the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 12/6/12 Notes, Page 3 of 5 Amendment to decision #2: Based on the updated appraisal data and the group’s assessment of the site’s value to the group, the TRIG agreed to change the total NTE (not to exceed) amount to be $368,000. We confirmed that a quorum is present and noted that Brock has Lou Ellyn Jones’ (USFWS) proxy. The TRIG approved the decision as amended by consensus of those present and represented. Ira will move forward with acquisition efforts and will keep the TRIG informed. Decision #3, as published in the agenda: Upon purchase of the Burpee Hill addition, does the TRIG authorize the use of up to $60,000 of the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding to be used to construct access roads so as to provide permanent access to the new properties? Tony refreshed the group about the background related to decision 3 discussed during the November conference call. He projected maps of the area and noted the current access challenges related to the parcel in question. The proposed roadwork would simplify the acquisition negotiations because it creates access that is not dependent on neighboring landowners. It would also reduce ongoing operating costs since maintenance would be necessary on a longer, less direct stretch of road if today’s decision #3 isn’t approved. The proposed funding is an estimated amount to pay for design work, cultural review, and construction of access road from property PSE already owns. Ira noted that this is a rough estimate since site evaluations need to wait until we have certainty that acquisition is moving forward. He also noted that if TRIG chooses not to spend acquisition money on access road construction, we would likely need to increase our acquisition costs to purchase an access easement instead. The group agreed that access is an appropriate acquisition cost and that it makes sense to plan for access roads on this parcel rather than access easements. The TRIG wants the opportunity to review and weigh in on road plans before work moves forward, so the group agreed to the following amendment to the decision wording. Amendment to decision #3: Upon purchase of the Burpee Hill addition, does the TRIG authorize the use of up to $10,000 of the SA 503 Elk Habitat acquisition funding to be used for road design work to ensure permanent access to the new properties, with the understanding that TRIG will review and approve a road plan prior to road construction (also to be funded by Article 503 acquisition dollars)? We confirmed that a quorum is present and noted that Brock has Lou Ellyn’s (USFWS) proxy. The TRIG approved the decision as amended by consensus of those present and represented. POST-ACQUISITION UPDATES Management Program for the Alder Creek Property document update: Tony reminded the group that, like the Weeds plan, this document is one of the TRIG’s “Living Documents” that can be updated as needed without requiring FERC review. The updated document now includes updated maps, known historical resources data, and geology, wetlands/streams, and roads data from the DNR Long Term Application process. It also includes any information that has been updated since the original approval, like guidelines from the Legacy Wood plan and maps of the parcel’s harvest plans from the DNR permit. In addition, the unit-by-unit primary goals, secondary goals, and management objectives have all been updated to match TRIG’s management unit prescriptions. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 12/6/12 Notes, Page 4 of 5 Decision #1 as published in the agenda: Does the TRIG agree to adopt the November 2012 version of the Updated Management Program for the Alder Creek Property document, with approved edits (if any) as our currently-approved working document? There were no requested edits at today’s meeting. Bill commended Tony and his team for the quality of work in the document. Tony noted that many people were involved in getting the document to this level of detail and accuracy and expressed thanks for the collaboration. We confirmed that a quorum is present and noted that Brock has Lou Ellyn’s (USFWS) proxy. With the understanding that this is a living document, subject to update as needed, the TRIG approved the decision without amendment by consensus of those present and represented. Alder Creek and Burpee Hill 2013 Work Plans Tony quickly reviewed the draft 2013 work plans for Alder Creek and Burpee Hill, which have been emailed to TRIG. These plans are due to be finalized in March; he wanted the group to have an early opportunity to review the draft and provide feedback. If you have any questions or comments about the draft plans, please contact Tony. Alder Creek 2012 Harvest Update Tony shared information and photos from the 2012 harvest work on the Alder Creek property. About six acres were cleared (4 acres of existing pasture and 2 that were previously forested) were opened up for improved elk forage. Scott and Tony put a temporary erosion control seed mix onto the bare new pasture areas. Most of the pasture areas have also been prepared for discing and pasture-seeding this spring. There were more trees than anticipated (about 500) in the “Christmas Tree” area, and the burn piles are significant. Tony suggests adding a little money to the harvester’s contract to take care of the burning before April (per DNR guidelines). TRIG agreed that the timing is right for this work, and Tony noted that it is consistent with the work outlined in the 2012 work plan and draft 2013 work plan, so he will move forward with this work. If anyone has questions or concerns, please contact Tony. MEETING EVALUATION  Good participation, food. Draft March 7, 2013 Agenda  Safety Moment, Review Agenda, Notes, AI  BRCC/License Updates, TRIG Budget Update  Land Acquisition Update – Burpee Hill addition  Post-Acquisition Updates o Burpee Hill o Alder Creek  514 Monitoring Plans Update  Loon platform Update  Botanical Teamlet Update  2013 Work Plan update Happy holidays, friends; see you again in 2013! BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 FINAL 12/6/12 Notes, Page 5 of 5  