 Final Meeting Notes February 4, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT BY PHONE Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Jacob Venard, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Christina VerHeul, and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Todd Wilbur (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community), Chris Madsen (NW Indian Fisheries Commission), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Don Gay and Ann Risvold (USFS); Chris Danilson (Sauk Suiattle Indian Tribe); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS: None today NEXT MEETING: Mar. 4 (no TRIG, will be changed to an 505 ARH meeting), Apr. 1 (likely in person from 9:00 -2:00), May 6, June 3, July 1, Aug. 5, Sept. 2, Oct. 7, Nov. 4, Dec. 2 (with Web-X capability) ACTION ITEMS  Tony and Ira – Talk with Ray and then contact the owners re Property Z.  Tony – Send out information on Property B with note not to re-distribute.  Brock – Send Tony list of any properties that are flagged for elk forage enhancement. Also send information on the blue lines on the Nooksack Elk Conceptual Forage Enhancement Areas.  Marty – Send out updated version of the post-acquisition outlines for Alder Creek Property.  Tony – Check with Joetta on getting the base information out with the ownership boundaries and the ortho photo for the Alder Creek Property.  Tony – Convene Alder Creek Management Plan Teamlet (Brock, Bob, Chris D, Marty, Brock, Chris M, Kathy, Joetta, Don, Haley, and Scott) prior to next meeting. Use Mark Hitchcock, Joetta, Jeff M as resource people for the teamlet. Set it up from 9:00 – noon on Feb 24 possibly at PSE Snoqualmie Office. Set up Web-Ex.  Marty – Draft an outline of the process to guide management plan development by February 19 and send out to all.  Tony – Send out timber Alder Creek Timber Management Plan to TRIG members.  Scott – Send out information on upcoming field trips.  Haley – Plan for celebration for purchase of Alder Creek property. PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Ira & Ray –Contact owner of "Property Z."  Tony and Kathy – Create a GIS base map for the Alder Creek property.  Christina – Work on simplified budget report sheet, provide to TRIG when available. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/4/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 4, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE Cary reported that PSE is continuing to provide monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually. The next in-person BRCC meeting is scheduled for April 28. TRIG Budget Update Christina reported that she met with PSE accounting folks to prepare for the annual report summary that will be coming out the end of March. The report will say what we have in terms of remaining acquisition funds and will show expenditures against the capped budgets. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE The Alder Creek Property Update Ira reported that we have a finalized draft document for the easement from DNR and are working toward completion of it. The signing of the document will trigger the payment to DNR for the easement. We are starting to develop a management plan for this property. We also have the names of potential teamlet members to develop that plan. We will use the post acquisition guidelines for this with the understanding that we may change the post acquisition guidelines as we create our first management plan for elk forage management property. Alternative Properties, WDFW Review of Alternatives Property M: Brock explained that WDFW reviewed this internally and found that they could not support the purchase of this property for elk management as they feel that encouraging elk to these parcels would cause further damage to agricultural and residential areas. There was consensus to remove this property from the list of parcels to be pursued at this time. Property Z: Brock reported that WDFW would support purchase of any of these properties. One of the things that makes these desirable is their proximity to DNR properties. The majority of these lands are forested. Chris M and Todd also support investigating the purchase of these properties. Next steps: Ira and Ray will contact the land owner. Property B: Tony explained that this property has some emergent wetland areas and forest habitat. The owner is potentially interesting in selling. There is potential for creating elk foraging habitat there. Next steps: Tony will send out information on this property to all to review. This area is known to be used by elk. Property T: Ira reported that this property includes farm land. The owner might be willing to sell about 34 acres close to, but not right on the Sauk River that are not being actively farmed. There was discussion around possibly contracting with the owner to farm for elk forage. Next steps: Ira will call the land owner and see if it is possible to brainstorm a range of strategies with him. Ira and a RMEF rep might be appropriate to sit down with the owner to discuss possibilities. POST ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES Feedback on Post-acquisition Outlines Tony explained that part of our requirement in the elk plan is to develop management procedures for the properties we purchase. We need to do this within one year of acquisition. Within a year of acquisition we intend to create a management plan for the parcel. This plan is for our own use. It is not something we would submit to FERC for their approval. We have been discussing some of the post acquisition information BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/4/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 4, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call collection methods. Marty created this draft outline as a living document to keep us focused and ensure a common understanding of what we are doing. We would use this outline as a starting point for deciding, on a parcel-by-parcel basis, which data collection methods would be appropriate. We walked through the outline and the post acquisition information list documents and noted suggested edits. Next steps: Marty will send out an updated version of the documents. Tony reported that we are building a base map for the Alder Creek property. It is not yet finalized. Joetta (R- 2 Resources) is working on getting the base information out with the ownership boundaries and the ortho photo. Alder Creek Property Activities Tony will convene an Alder Creek Management Plan Teamlet prior to next meeting:, Bob N, Chris D, Marty, Brock, Chris M, Kathy, Tony, Joetta, Don, Haley, and Scott have volunteered to be on the teamlet. He will consider the Snoqualmie PSE office location for that meeting. One of their initial activities will be to set objectives. The agenda would include reviewing current data, brainstorming appropriate management activities, and discussing data needs. BALD EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY / LOON UPDATE Update Tony, Scott, Mel, Brock, Nathaniel joined Haley on a night roost survey on Jan. 15. They went out again on Jan. 28. They observed perching in an area by three birds at one time, but no official roost was identified. Feb. 11 and 25 are the next survey dates. On Feb. 11 in the morning they will check loon platforms on Upper Baker. Tony, Scott, and Haley will be going out with Pam Garland. They will also be looking at some Tansy ragwort sites and will also be observing some dispersed recreation sites. Haley has put in a work request to install an additional buoy for no-wake zones for each Upper Baker Loon platform and installation of a loon platform on Lake Shannon. She is putting together the presentation on the survey findings for our face-to-face meeting in April. Mel is preparing an osprey update for that same meeting. BOTANICAL TEAMLET Teamlet Meeting Update Scott reported that he and the teamlet of Ann Risvold, Laura Martin, Jason Schmidt, Tony Fuchs, Kathy Smayda, and Brock Applegate met yesterday in Burlington from 9-noon. They reviewed 2010 plans for Reed canary grass management of Article 508: Noxious Weeds. The reed canary grass management plan was reviewed and includes a detail of the seven wetlands designated for management. There will be a portfolio developed for each wetland describing the density of reed canary grass in each, location of patches, high value elements, etc. Elevation data will be incorporated. Multiple photo points will be established. The 2010 planning will form our strategy for 2011 where we will get out there and begin testing some techniques. A site visit to wetland site WB-17 to test some data collection methods will occur in the first part of March. Scott will send a note out as soon as the date is set. They will be GPSing a patch of reed canary grass, rating the wetland, and looking for high-value elements to identify parts of the wetland we want to protect from reed canary grass. Ann Risvold added that the reason 2010 was determined to be a planning year was to gather more data and gain expertise from wetland and noxious weed management experts. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/4/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4 Final Meeting Notes February 4, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call They also discussed wetland re-vegetation and the Forest Service’s Native Plant Materials Policy. There is an ivy site beyond Baker Lake at the old spawning beaches. Ivy removal will occur in March or April. There are some Tansy ragwort sites that will be visited next week, rosettes may be present this time of year. The sites will be revisited in May and June. Priority species designated for weed management this year include ivy and tansy ragwort. Scott will contact a couple of nurseries to contract grow some wetland emergent species as we know we will plant these species eventually. MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Good participation  Got out early  Technology worked well Do Differently:  More visuals  No meeting in March  Meet in person in April Draft April 1, 2010 TRIG Agenda (No TRIG meeting in March)  BRCC / License Update, TRIG Budget Update  Land Acquisition Update o Alder Creek celebration? o Other properties  Feedback on Post-acquisition outlines for Alder Creek Property  Bald Eagle Survey Presentation  Osprey Presentation  Botanical Teamlet Update  Other Updates?  Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for May 6 Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027 Final 2/4/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4  