 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group November 27, 2000 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. PSE Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mt. Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review previous meeting notes 3 Review action items 4. Finish defining interests by organization 5. Begin refining issues and information needs 6. Discuss views on combined Hydro 101 and flood control presentation 7. Set agenda for next meeting (December 18) 8. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group November 27, 2000 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. PSE Office, Mt. Vernon, WA MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Curt Miller (Miller Consulting), Saul Weisburg (North Cascades Institute), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: 2001 meeting dates are as follows: 1/22, 2/26, 3/26. Times will remain 10:00-1:00 p.m. The location will remain at the PSE office in Mount Vernon, WA NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Bring list of what we need to know to accomplish team mission, meet individual interests and address pertinent issues • Saul: Contact Nature Conservancy, NCCC, Park Service, City of Concrete, Forest Service re: their interests in outreach and education. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES Page 1 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Chris: Contact the National Park Service re: sending a representative to these meetings. • Tony: Review current license re: access across Upper Baker dam and North access. • Tony: Check with Wayne Wagner re: flood control presentation at January 22, 2001 meeting. • Tony: Contact PacifiCorp re: studies process • Ann: Check availability of Watershed Analysis for review REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Chris: Emailed draft outline of Bob Barnes’ Hydro 101 presentation and fact sheet to all team members and originally asked Bob to present at November meeting (subsequent to further discussion about Hydro 1010 and flood control presentations, Tony arranged for Bob to present Hydro 101 at December 18 meeting instead of November meeting) • Ann: Distributed a draft of Forest Service interests updated • All: Reviewed list of organization-specific interests, got feedback from respective organizations • Chris: Contacted missing members and encouraged their attendance and let them know about option to participate via conference call. We are pleased to have Curt and Saul’s participation. Jim has authority to represent the State Parks. Paul Schissler (Town of Concrete) will not be able to attend regularly but is attempting to find a representative for this team. Skagit County expects to be able to participate in 2001. Tony added that the Nature Conservancy is ready to help out as land management issues occur. November 27, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Finish defining interests and issues 4. Begin Defining Studies 5. Set agenda for next meeting (December 18 meeting) • Wayne Wagner’s Flood Presentation • Confirm 2001 meeting schedule 6. Evaluate meeting ISSUES AND INTERESTS The team defined the following draft interest statements by organization: InterAgency Committee for Outdoor Recreation (IAC): 1. Develop recreation plan consistent with SCORP document. Meet all requirements of laws, policy, and management plan direction (including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act) 2. Met FERC requirements re: aesthetics and recreation, including need to address potential recreation, not just current recreation 3. Employ a process that produced recreation plan consistent with data gathered under credible studies required of the applicant. 4. Give recreation equal consideration to other resources including fish and wildlife 5. Provide non-motorized trails associated with water. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES Page 2 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 WDFW: 1. Provide recreational opportunities and experiences in balance with resource protection needs and constraints. 2. Understand current and future carrying capacity for recreation use in the Baker River Basin. FOREST SERVICE: 1. Providing a variety of developed and dispersed recreational opportunities and experiences consistent with all laws, regulations and policies and management direction in approved management plans. 2. Providing a safe, high quality visitor experience. 3. Providing recreation opportunities in concert with the attainment of ecosystem function and habitat connectivity goals. 4. Maintaining or improving scenic and aesthetic quality within viewsheds accessed from National Forest Lands. 5. Providing access to National Forest Lands for recreation. 6. Providing physical, cultural, and historical linkages to areas on and off Forest lands where appropriate. 7. Developing and maintaining replicable baseline data for recreation. 8. Working collaboratively with partners to develop an adaptive recreation plan for the Baker River Project that addresses present and future recreation issues and Forest Service interests. TOWN OF CONCRETE: 1. Provide socio-economic support for the Town of Concrete NORTH CASCADES INSTITUTE: 1. Provide public education, outreach and interpretation about the natural and cultural resources of the Baker River Watershed and the adjacent North Cascades ecosystem for diverse audiences of all ages, learning styles and across cultural and economic boundaries. • Following the Washington State environmental education mandate, provide environmental education curricula and locally-relevant education experiences about the Baker River Basin to grades K-12 in field-based and classroom settings. • Within the Baker River Project communities, develop models for place-based education that uses the watershed and the local environment as an integrating context in education (reference: Pew Charitable Trust EIC study). • Provide access to selected public and private lands within the Baker River Basin for educational and interpretive activities. • Develop educational and interpretive materials and programs that use data from scientific and cultural research conducted in the Basin by state and federal agencies and PSE. • Work collaboratively with partners to develop an adaptive plan for environmental education and interpretation in the Baker River Basin. CURT MILLER (MILLER CONSULTING): 1. Provide an overall approach to landscape management for the Basin. (Possible Solution: Develop guidelines for design or change that address the visual aspects of management actions) 2. Understand how important the visual quality (scenery) is to area users and how sensitive are they to change? DEFINING STUDIES Tony explained that, in order to submit a budget request for Baker River relicensing efforts in 2001, PSE staff had needed to develop a forecast of expected study requirements. For all resource areas/working groups PSE had listed certain types of studies assumed to be needed in 2001, based on FERC information BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES Page 3 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 requirements, and developed ballpark cost estimates. It was suggested that PSE share that list with the team, as a possible point of departure for determining study needs. The team leader suggested that the team not be bound to/limited to the PSE budget forecast, as the group should independently identify information needs and corresponding studies. He also noted that the forecast list for the 2001 field season included only recreation inventory work, with the assumption that other types of recreation studies plus land management and aesthetics work would be conducted in 2002. Tony added that PSE will be flexible re: studies and will need to be able to justify any studies they request money to do. It was also suggested that we work to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of studies by maintaining a comprehensive approach (e.g. questioning current users, etc.) There was a request for other examples of study plans from other projects. Jim indicated that PacifiCorp had a process for defining Lewis River study needs that might be a good example. Tony will pursue. WATERSHED ANALYSIS A draft watershed analysis for the Baker River has been prepared by the Forest Service. Ann will see if it is available to team members for review. PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals Bounce around with meeting locations Operationally Define “vicinity”, “watershed”, “project induced”, “dispersed”, or “displaced” List authorities that this team must be aware of Be sure someone from Recreational Resources area sits on the Solution Team. Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole. Get guest speaker from Seattle City Light Offer “Hydro 101” course (lake levels, operations) Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Good bagels • Good note-taking • Got through the interests • Good discussion on interests • Saul and Curt Need for Improvement • Unrepresented groups TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING December 18, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES Page 4 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 3. Hydro 101 Presentation---Bob Barnes 4. Solution Team Update 5. Review timeline 6. Continue defining studies 7. Set agenda for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR JANUARY MEETING January 22, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Flood Control Presentation---Wayne Wagner (?) 4. Continue defining studies 5. Set agenda for Feb. 26 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES Page 5 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  