BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group July 24, 2000 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro Woolley, WA  AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review previous meeting notes 3  Review action items  4. Review list of other recreation contacts 5. Provide update on recreation portion of Baker River Watershed Analysis. Review (recreation portion only) issues from the analysis. 6. Continue defining issues and interests 7. Review proposed tour content for August meeting 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group July 24, 2000 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro Woolley, WA  MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy) (425) 462-3552, cdrech@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc, Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group), Ken Wilcox (Osprey Environmental Services, Inc.), Curt Miller (Miller Consulting), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: Team members agreed to meet monthly on the fourth Monday, with the exception being the month of October, when they will meet on the last Monday, and December, when they will meet on the third Monday. They will meet in Mt. Vernon for the remaining meetings this year. Those dates are Sept. 25, Oct. 30, Nov. 27, Dec. 18. Times will remain 10:00-1:00 p.m. ACTION ITEMS • Ann to bring a copy of symposium abstracts • Curt will look for his notes from symposium The meeting started at 10:00 a.m. and ended at 1:15 p.m. INTRODUCTIONS Each member of the group introduced themselves for the new participants of the group.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   MEETING AGENDA July 24, 2000, 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office, Sedro Woolley,WA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review notes 3. Review action items 4. Review list of other contacts 5. Review (recreation portion only) issues from Baker River Watershed Analysis 6. Continue defining issues and interests 7. Project tour content for August meeting. 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP Ann and Chris got together and reviewed a Forest Service list of user group contacts. Chris sent them letters and gave them meeting dates and his contact information in case they have information. Getting the right people involved will be an iterative process. JULY 25 OVERVIEW TEAM MEETING 10:00 a.m. at Cotton Tree Inn, Mt. Vernon Chris distributed the agenda for the upcoming Overview Team Meeting. It includes: High level timeline Formation of the solution team Working group status Communication protocol Website Documents Email “Resolve Training” Overview REVIEW OF THE DRAFT BAKER RIVER WATERSHED ANALYSIS Ann Dunphy presented an overview of the Forest Service’s Draft Watershed Analysis. The Forest Service is now reviewing the analysis with various parties who have contributed to it. It should be ready for wide distribution by the end of the year. Key recreation issues identified in the analysis: •  Meeting terrestrial and aquatic concerns may limit the ability to provide additional recreational facilities.  •  Older developed facilities are in need of repair and refurbishing.  •  Lack of sanitary facilities at some developed and most dispersed sites.  •  Potential resource damage at dispersed campsites.  •  Need to assess impacts to wilderness areas.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   •  Need for better communication, visitor information, and additional law enforcement personnel.  •  Fluctuating lake levels are affecting recreation use and aesthetics.  •  Need to assess additional trail and developed recreation needs.  •  Need for a complete a recreation plan for the watershed including a visitor use profile, market analysis and site inventory for all recreation uses.  •  Need to identify level and type of “project induced recreation”.  •  Need to assess scenery and aesthetics including “sense of place”.  PROJECT BOUNDARIES There was discussion of the boundaries that the Recreation Working Group should consider with regard to the Baker River Project. When we look at recreation and aesthetics we want to make sure that the scope is well defined so that we are looking at things within the project boundary or has a strong relationship to the Project. ISSUES AND INTERESTS Chris distributed a draft of a new format he came up with to facilitate the discussion of issues and interests. The team reviewed the existing list of issues and interests and re-defined them within the context of the table below: Interests Keep “natural” setting (use needs to fit the place, what do you want the place to be? Which uses are therefore appropriate?  Issues/Topics Noise from boats, jet-skies, campers  Possible Solutions Non-motorized boating options  Identify impacts of recreation on other resources  Bicycling as a mode of transportation for moving around the basin  Diminished opportunity to go onto a trail without running into lots of people Provide recreational opportunities and experiences in balance with resource protection needs and constraints Protect lakes from water pollution Look at impacts of dispersed camping in the Baker River Basin (trash & BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   human waste)  Recreation Plan consistent with SCORP document Meet all regulations of laws, policy & direction management plans (include Wild & Scenic Rivers Act)  Non-motorized trails associated with water  Meet FERC requirements re: aesthetics & recreation (also include Wild and Scenic Rivers Act)  Identify scenic, educational, and aesthetic resources. Identify recreational opportunities at the Baker River Basin Determine current and future carrying capacity for recreation use in the Baker River Basin. Conditions of existing recreational sites and facilities within the Project boundary or reasonable associated with the Project  Overuse & abuse of resources  Safety, economics, aesthetics, quality of experience, user convenience, sustainability. Maintaining “sense of place.”  Meeting FERC requirements to address potential recreation Accommodate public access to sites (project lands and waters) • • • • •  Conforming to standards for new development/facilities Lake levels, project impacts, effects on recreation, aesthetics Dispersed recreation (current and potential) Consider access/management of travel routes and facilities  Project boundaries (?) Jet skis (mix of uses on water) Boating access (no long waits and places to park) Restoration of recreation (established or dispersed) damaged sites Baker River Resort setting and experience in that setting (long-term clientele)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  Winter-related recreational resources View points, way-finding points, etc. Provide visitor information services Our campgrounds are over capacity now and we expect this trend to continue Trail systems are currently inadequate Insufficient visitor control (re: proper use of basin) Safety/health issues of users (adequate law enforcement) Provide fishing and other access for disabled (disabled persons can’t currently enjoy recreational facilities) What is the visual character of the Basin and how it has changed over time? What are the stories to be told in the basin (interpretation)? Improved public education, outreach and interpretation Improve and create back country trails- system of trails- loop systems More trails in more developed areas Use Concrete, WA as a focal point for trail access Create water trail system Develop scenic/aesthetic management objectives and management strategies to meet the objectives Improve identification of all recreational opportunities (basin wide) Develop education and interpretive plan to include specific resource area information Develop ways to implement and sustain the plan Leverage existing resources for education Develop public communication system Identification of private lands around reservoir Provide access to Lake Shannon Low level hiking opportunities Improve opportunities for viewing spawning fish Possible relocation and/or expansion of existing interpretive facilities  PROJECT TOUR This team will meet at 8:00 at the PSE Office in Concrete for their tour on Aug. 28. The team will do a road trip in the morning and a high country hike in the p.m. depending on weather. Chris will explore the possibility of doing the tour by boat in September. Lunches will be provided. The team is planning, if possible, to also do a follow-up tour on September 11 in order to accommodate everyone’s interests. PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals July or August tour of Baker Project? Bounce around with meeting locations Demystify the decision making process of Forest Service. List authorities that this team must be aware of. Share information from Bellingham Eighth International Symposium on Society & Resource Be sure someone from Recreational Resources area sits on the Solution Team. Management "Transcending Boundaries: Natural Resource Management from Summit to Sea.” BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole. Get guest speaker from Seattle City Light Offer “Hydro 101” course (lake levels, operations) EVALUATION OF MEETING THINGS DONE WELL Bagels Made good progress on issues/interests Forest Service facility Ann’s presentation NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT Ran over by 15 minutes Sept. 11 tour is ill-defined Need to do a better job of setting FERC context TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING September 25, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Debrief Tour 4. Ed Schild and Joel Molander (PSE) to speak. 5. FERC regulations and context regarding recreation (Chris Lawson) 6. Continue defining issues and interests 7. Set agenda for next meeting (Oct. 30) 8. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6    2000recreational20000724.pdf en 