BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fisheries & Aquatic Resources Working Group June 8, 2000 1:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way, Mount Vernon, WA  AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Status report from technical working team 7. Background information: • Reports from agencies/organizations on their mandates/policies • Gary: Baker Sockeye • PSE: Fish History (this will also be placed on the web when it is available) 8. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting)  9. Set agenda for next meeting 10. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group June 8, 2000 1:30 p.m. – 4:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund (425) 462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT Jon Vanderheyden (USDA- Forest Service), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Bob Newman (WA Dept. of Ecology), Jerry Louthain Consultant to City of Anacortes, and Skagit PUD (Economic & Engineering Services, Inc.), Reed Glesne (National Park Service), Polly Fischer (Puget Sound Anglers), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Carol Bordin (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelheaders), Dick Raisler, (Fidalgo Flyfishers); Michael Bruce (Concrete School District); Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting), ACTION ITEMS • Contact “would-be participants” • Those contacting “would-be participants” should inform them of the mission statement, minutes, schedule, web-site, and ask for the appropriate contact person and invite them to the meetings: Who? NMFS USFWS Corps of Engineers WA Dept of Transportation Interagency Commission Outdoor Recre  Who will contact? Gary Sprague Gary Sprague Nick Verretto Nick Verretto Nick Verretto  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   Skagit Conservation District Washington Trout Trout Unlimited American Rivers Seattle City Light Other area towns Department of Natural Resources CTED •  • •  Carol Bordin Carol Bordin Carol Bordin Carol Bordin Arnie Aspelund Arnie Aspelund Arn Thoreen Rod Sakrison  Gary Sprague will : • Get harvest numbers • Bring copy of sockeye presentation • Get copies of 1999 document by Jeff Cederholm All: Review Interests/Issues list generated from 4/26/00 Overview team meeting All: NOTE CHANGE IN LOCATION OF JULY 13 MEETING! (to Sedro Woolley, USFS/NPS Station)  The meeting started at 1:30 p.m and ended at 4:30 p.m. AGENDA REVIEW The team reviewed the agenda. MEETING AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Background information: • Reports from agencies/organizations on their mandates/policies • Gary: Baker Sockeye • PSE: Fish History (this will also be placed on the web when it is available) 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting MINUTES REVIEW Previous meeting minutes were distributed. INTRODUCTIONS Participants each introduced themselves. FINAL TEAM MISSION STATEMENT The team revised the draft mission statement to read as follows:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   “To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement. WHO ELSE SHOULD BE INVOLVED? In order for the team to successfully accomplish its mission, it was suggested that the following entities participate: Who NMFS USFWS Corps of Engineers Skagit Conservation District Washington Trout Trout Unlimited American Rivers Seattle City Light Department of Natural Resources Other area towns CTED WA Dept. of Transportation Concrete School District 11 MEETING NORMS The team amended norms as indicated in bold: 1. Meet the afternoon of the second Thursday of the month from 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. (next few meetings are July 13 (in Sedro Woolley), August 10, September 14 (in Mount Vernon) 2. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 3. If miss, let team leader know, send representative if possible (prep them first) 4. No backing up for late comers. 5. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes 6. Begin each meeting with review/amendments of minutes. 7. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 8. No physical/psychological violence (no poke in the eye/cheap shots) 9. No official quorum. 10. About a 10-15 minute break half way through. 11. PSE will bring treats (fruit, cookies, juice, and coffee). 12. May need to “park” ideas and move on. 13. Have report from technical working groups as a regular part of the agenda 14. “Teamlets” will do lots of work outside of the meeting and come back and share with the larger team. 15. Humor is good! 16. Avoid side conversations. 17. Listen to each other. 18. Respect diverse opinions. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   19. Keep an open mind. 20. Be honest and kind at the same time. 21. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 22. Have fun. 23. Don’t interrupt each other. 24. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 25. Decisions will be made by consensus where possible. 26. Share data and information. 27. Define acronyms. 28. Have a facilitator present. 29. Do active listening (paraphrase back). 30. If can’t make a meeting, notify team leader (Arnie) by email a.s.a.p. 31. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 32. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. 33. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members within 3 working days. 34. PSE will e-mail draft and final minutes to team members. Members will e-mail their comments on the draft to Arnie within 5 working days of receiving them. Team leader will then post them on the web. BACKGROUND INFORMATION • Gary Sprague distributed a list of Baker River documents available at WDFW. If interested in copies contact Gary. • Arnie Aspelund distributed the whole License for the Baker Project, along with two supplemental agreements: 1) The Corps flood control agreement (located mid-way through the handout Arnie provided) 2) Final supplement is a 1966 agreement that outlines responsibilities under Article 33 (spawning beaches and passage facilities). Arnie noted that Article 33 located on page 9 of the license document is where you will find fish conservation information pertaining to the license. • Arnie said “Salmon on the Baker River” will be posted soon (June) on the web-site. It covers salmon resources, and history over past 150 years. eg. Physical characteristics of area Native American uses of resource Early years/ hydroelectric development/Environmental era (last 30 years) It was suggested that PSE offer this document for agency review of the draft. PSE declined the offer. PSE’s intent was to tell a story. This document represents Historical Research Associates take on the history and also contains a detailed bibliography for additional reference research. There was a concern expressed about having a historical organization do a biological review. Many also expressed appreciation for PSE’s effort in compiling the document. Feedback on the document from team members will be forthcoming. •  The Existing Corps flood control agreement expires September 30, 2000. The Corps and PSE are discussing extensions.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   • • • •  The team decided to change their name from “Fisheries” to “Fish” to be consistent with its mission statement. Gary Sprague presented an overview (and slides) of the history of Sockeye Salmon runs at Baker Carol Bordin offered various documents from WDFW. Various team members shared the missions, goal, strategic plans for their organizations (these statements will be provided in written form on the website).  ISSUES/INTERESTS A listing of interests was begun from the discussion of mission statements and goals. Interests • Maintaining and restoring native populations and natural processes • Maintain ecological relationships in the watershed • To protect, preserve and perpetuate fish and wildlife in their natural habitats • Promote ethical sport fishing • To manage treaty protected fisheries resources for 3 tribes along the Skagit Basin. • Having Sockeye become equally available to non-native Americans for recreational purposes along with tribal needs Parking Lot • Watershed Analysis- presentation by Brady Green possibly at August meeting • Feedback on “Salmon on the Baker River” document • Different perspectives • Post reviews on web? • Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS in September or October) Evaluation of Meeting Pluses Fruit Slide Show Started and ended on time Stuck to norms and self-policed Facilitation Minuses Estimate time Evaluate things after we know what they are rather than conjecture Warm Room Crowded TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 13, 2000 Agenda 1:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. Park Service/Forest Service Office BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   2105 Hwy 20, Sedro Woolley 1. Review/revise agenda and minutes 2. Action Items 3. Who else should be in the team? 4. Status report from technical working team? 5. Other organizations mission / (broad) goals 6. Interests and Issues 7. Break 8. Interests and Issues 9. Set agenda for next meeting 10. Evaluate meeting  1:30- 1:35 1:35- 2:00 2:00- 2:10 2:10 -2:25 2:25- 2:35 2:35- 3:10 3:10- 3:20 3:20- 4:20 4:20- 4:25 4:25- 4:30  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6    2000aquatic20000608.pdf en 