BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group June 20, 2000 9:30 a.m. <ad> 12:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way, Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Status report from technical working team? 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group June 20, 2000 PSE Office at 1700 College Way, Mt. Vernon The meeting started at 9:45 a.m. and ended at 12:35 p.m. MEETING NOTES TEAM LEADER: Tony Fuchs (Phone: 425-462-3553; E-mail: tfuchs@puget.com) ATTENDEES: Laurel Baldwin (Whatcom County Noxious Weed Control Board), Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Don Gay (US Forest Service), Robert Kuntz (National Park Service), Ann Risvold (US Forest Service), Fred Seavey (US Fish & Wildlife Service), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Lauri Vigue (WA Dept. of Fish & Wildlife), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) JUNE 20TH MEETING AGENDA COMPLETION STATUS 1. The team reviewed the agenda and introduced new members 2. After the agenda review, members briefly introduced themselves to one another 3. The team revised the mission statement to read as follows: Mission Statement: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) 3. leads to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options."  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   4. Who else should be on the team to enable success? Dept. of Natural Resources - Rich Sluss County contact re: land use Action Items on Agenda Item #4 <b7> Tony to find county contact (Skagit and Whatcom counties) re: land use and to contact Rich Sluss (DNR) to join as team members <b7> Lauri: Check availability of Mill Creek office for future meetings (future meetings) <b7> Don: Check availability of Forest Service office at Mt. Lake Terrace (Sept. 19th meeting; reserve through December 2000) 4. The team revised the meeting norms: omit #2, #5; added to #5 and #8; see revised below 5. ACTION ITEMS - GENERAL <b7> Marty copied a beginning list of available information/studies, "Terrestrial Data for the Baker Project"; all team members were encouraged to add to the list (to be posted along with meeting minutes on website) <b7> Other available information will become part of each meeting agenda <b7> Tony to talk with web master re: how best to post miscellaneous working group documents on website. <b7> There was a question regarding the status of the Project Information Package. Tony stated that it may be ready to share at the Baker Overview Team meeting on July 25th (Cotton Tree Inn, Mt. Vernon). As this document is not part of the FERC record, there will be no formal public review. People will be asked at the July 25th meeting how they would like to receive the document (e.g. electronically, hard copy, etc.) <b7> Laurel: get state and county definitions of "noxious weed" and species list 6. The team reviewed the list of definitions generated by Barb Revo (see below); the team also reviewed the list of Issues and Interests generated at the April 26th Public Information Meeting. Interest: An underlying need, fear, or concern (reasons why the issue is important to you and what your needs and concerns are) Issue: A neutral statement (that we are going to talk about) Position: One option for solution (may or may not meet everyone's needs) Solution: Agreed upon by both parties and meets one party's needs without hurting the other party. Could meet the needs of both parties. MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team: 1. Meet the morning of the third Tuesday of each month from 9:30 to 12:30 p.m.; the next two meetings are July 18th (Forest Service Office, Sedro Woolley), and field trip to Baker River Project on August 15th 2. Meetings will start and end on time. 3. Use consensus decision-making where possible. 4. E-mail/voicemail Tony if you can't make a meeting. Tony will contact other team members re: how to proceed (e.g., the team may decide not to meet, to change the meeting location, or to have a technical working group meet instead).  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   5. Tony to e-mail meeting reminder notice and final version of minutes to team members one week prior to each meeting. 6. Team leader brings extra hard copies of meeting minutes to each meeting. 7. If Tony misses, Marty will act as back-up team leader. 8. If miss, let team leader know, send representative if possible (prep them first). 9. No backing up for late comers; and substitute representative will state to the team whether he or she has authority to represent you or just taking notes. 10. Tony will send minutes to all members within 3 working days of the meeting. 11. Team members notify Tony of changes to minutes within 8 working days, then Tony will post them on the web. 12. Have a 10 minute break half way through. 13. Tony will bring treats (coffee, juice, hot water for tea, and some form of carbohydrates). 14. No side conversations. 15. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes. 16. Put yourself in the other person's shoes (work to understand each other's perspectives). 17. Have a facilitator to keep the group on track. 18. Share information as it becomes available. 19. Define acronyms. 20. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 21. Listen to each other. 22. Celebrate diverse opinions. 23. Keep an open mind. 24. Be honest and kind at the same time. 25. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 26. Have fun. 27. Don't interrupt each other. 28. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 29. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. PARKING LOT <b7> Alteration of Solution Team Mission Statement (once the team is formed) <b7> Length of period of relicense (30 years? 50 years?) <b7> *Operational definition: in reference to team mission statement: "previous environment" is defined as "environment prior to Baker River Project construction." <b7> Consider list of multiple meeting locations and rotation - perhaps set Mt. Lake Terrace as default <b7> Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones <b7> Definition of Project Boundary <b7> Definition of Project effects MEETING PROCESS REVIEW <b7> Don't get tangled up in issues vs. Interests <b7> Try to speak in summary form  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   <b7> Slow down meeting a bit - we need more thinking time; allow more time for working through (defining) each issue/interest. <b7> Keep in mind the context - things we want to out of this; 1) Studies 2) Available solutions TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 18, 2000 (9:45 a.m. - 12:45 p.m.) - Forest Service office, Sedro Woolley AGENDA 1. Review agenda 2. Status report: Action items; Project Information Package update 3. Issues/Interests 4. Other available information? 5. High level timeline 6. Other issues 7. Set agenda for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting  Draft List of Terrestrial and Wildlife Resource Issues Wildlife & Terrestrial Resources Working Group 1. Noxious (non-native) Species - characterize problem (need more information on what and where) Issue (1) - Non-native species can outcompete/displace native species and change processes in the ecosystem or habitat. Issue (2) - Fear of extinction of certain plant/animal species. Issue (3) - Non-native species/potential for non-native species exists in the vicinity of the Baker River Project. Interest (1) - Determine Baker River Project contribution to the invasion of non-native species in the area. Interest (2) - Controlling/eliminating non-native species in the vicinity of the Baker River Project. 2. Loss of rare plant habitat Interest (1) - Maintaining and restoring rare plants and their habitats in the Basin Interest (2) - We may have lost rare plants/have lost rare plant habitats or we may lose them in the future 3. Wetland, riparian habitats (ecosystem process) Interest (1) - Reservoir (rather than river) disrupts plant dispersal and plant community dynamics Interest (2) - Protecting, maintaining and enhancing wetland and riparian functions (plant & animal) 4. Inundation habitat loss - wetlands, riparian, deer & elk winter range (e.g. Oregon spotted frog) Issue (1) - Project operation/fluctuation of reservoir Issue (2) - Direct loss of previous habitat (Don Gay suggests this should read "Continued loss of habitats inundated by dams"). Issue (3) - Importance of low gradient/low elevation riparian habitat inundated by continued existence of hydro-power project: <b7> Effects to low elevation grizzly bear spring foraging habitat. <b7> Effects on forest carnivore habitat (e.g. fisher, wolverine, cougar, lynx). <b7> Effects on resident and neo-tropical migrant songbirds habitat (specifically species dependent on cottonwood overstory and willow shrub habitats). Issue (4) - Deer and elk winter range forage Interest (1) - Addressing habitat loss Interest (2) - Addressing impacts on species of concern/interest BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   Interest (3) - May have lost connectivity to habitats within the park itself Interest (4) - Populations are disappearing - reservoir creates recruitment barrier 5. Fluctuating water levels - s&m species and precluding loon and other waterfowl nesting 6. LSR impacts - # of species that can be supported, connectivity edge effect on HS (Habitat Suitability) for species 7. Recreation impacts - Grizzly bear, mountain goat, other 8. Productivity - reduced species compliment & biomass of migratory fish 9. Potential recreational impacts to rare plants, habitats, and species 10. Potential impacts to DNR managed trust lands - HCP 11. Public Environmental Education & Outreach - Terrestrial issues 12. Designate areas for specific uses - e.g.: keep beaver areas for beavers and low impact human use 13. Bats & other spp of concern which may be enhanced by project activities 14. Ecotourism as means of enhancing wildlife - management of rec/users for enhancement of wildlife (i.e. Visitor trail, walkways, interp signs) 15. Promotion of biodiversity - including those other than fish & mammals (i.e. plants, invertebrates, microbes)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2000wildlife20000620.pdf en 