BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group Meeting May 25, 2000 3:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 (map attached)  Agenda 1.  Welcome & Introductions  2.  Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is costeffective and consistent with public interests.”  3.  Set working group social and logistical norms.  4.  Identify others who should participate in the group.  5.  Set agenda for next meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Page 1 of 1  file://N:\Baker Relicense\Website Information\Files for web site\map.gif  4/28/2000   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural and Historical Resources Working Group May 25, 2000 3:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Connie Freeland, 425-462-3556, cfreel@puget.com Attendees: Kathy Anderson, (US Forest Service), Paula Hartzell (Town of Concrete), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) PARKING LOT • Decide how to handle action items (open/closed, etc.) • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Define “cultural resources” in consultation with Tribes and public • Quorum? ACTION ITEMS • Everyone: Review list of issues and interests that Connie handed out. The meeting started at 3:15 p.m. and ended at 5:05 p.m. MEETING AGENDA 1. Welcome 2. Introductions 3. Review Baker Relicense Structure and Baker Solution Team Mission 4. Set team mission statement 5. Who else should be on the team? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   6. Set social and logistical norms 7. Set agenda for the next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS After the welcome, members introduced themselves and stated why they were here: Paula: Representing the Town of Concrete Kathy: Effects on national forest resources and Skagit River Larry: Cultural resource planner representing Swinomish Tribe Gail: Here to learn and compile information John: Representing Concrete Heritage Museum Association Connie: Program Manager for Baker Relicense effort. Also the team leader (PSE point of contact for this group) BAKER RELICENSE STRUCTURE Connie reviewed the structure of the Baker Relicense Project. Timeline: By late summer, the Overview Team will ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for permission to use the alternative “collaborative” licensing procedures. Puget Sound Energy (PSE) will submit the license application to FERC on or before April 30, 2004. Structure: The Overview team is made up of those who attend the public meetings on the subject of the Baker Relicense. These members have selected which working groups they are interested in joining. There are 6 working groups representing various topic areas. Each working group may have one or more technical working groups to provide specific technical input to the working teams. All working groups will provide recommendations to the Baker Solution Team which will be formed in October, 2000. The Baker Solution Team will integrate and balance the recommendations it receives from the working groups in order to formulate a mutually agreed-upon license application to submit to FERC. BAKER SOLUTION TEAM MISSION STATEMENT “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests.” DRAFT MISSION STATEMENT The team came up with the following rough draft of a mission statement: “To develop alternatives and recommendations that serve the public interest concerning cultural, historical, and archeological resources for Baker River Project relicensing process.” The team will review/revise this statement at the start of the next meeting. OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP Upper Skagit Sauk-Suiattle Nooksack BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   Samish N’lakapamux National Park Service State Historic Preservation Office MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team: 1. Meet the afternoon of the third Tuesday of the month from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon. The next few meetings will be June 20, July 18 (at Forest Service Office in Sedro-Woolley), August 15. 2. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 3. If miss, let team leader know (email or phone), send representative if possible (prep them first). 4. No backing up for late comers. 5. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes. 6. Begin each meeting with quick review of changes to the minutes. 7. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 8. Average a 15 minute break approximately half way through. 9. PSE will bring treats (fruit, cookies, juice, water, and coffee). 10. Confidential information will not be posted. 11. When appropriate, preface remarks “This is confidential…” 12. No long speeches without permission of the team. [Delete; is duplicate of #5.] 13. Avoid lengthy independent discussions. 14. We are making recommendations, not decisions. 15. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 16. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, parking lot, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. 17. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members soon after the meeting. 18. Members will e-mail their comments to Connie within 5 working days of receiving them. She will then post them on the web. 19. Listen to each other. 20. Celebrate diverse opinions. 21. Keep an open mind. 22. Be honest and kind at the same time. 23. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 24. Have fun. 25. Don’t interrupt each other. 26. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 27. Recommendations will be made by consensus where possible. TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING June 20, 2000 Agenda 1. Review/revise agenda BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  Introductions Review/revise/complete mission statement Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? Review/amend/add to meeting norms Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) Set agenda for next meeting Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4    2000cultural20000525.pdf en 