BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fisheries & Aquatic Resources Working Group Meeting May 18, 2000 3:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 (map attached)  Agenda 1.  Welcome & Introductions  2.  Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is costeffective and consistent with public interests.”  3.  Set working group social and logistical norms.  4.  Identify others who should participate in the group.  5.  Set agenda for next meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Page 1 of 1  file://N:\Baker Relicense\Website Information\Files for web site\map.gif  4/28/2000   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Working Group May 18, 2000 3:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund (425) 462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT Kathy Anderson, (US Forest Service), Reed Glesne (National Park Service), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Paula Hartzell (Town of Concrete), Bob Newman (WA Dept.of Ecology), Jerry Louthain (Economic & Engineering Services, Inc.- for City of Anacortes and Skagit County PUD No. 1), Polly Fischer (Puget Sound Anglers, et.al.), Dick Raisler, (Fidalgo Flyfishers) , Derek Koellmann (Skagit County Public Works), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Carol Bordin (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Arnie Aspelund (Puget Sound Energy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) ACTION ITEMS • Gary: Bring list of documents for people who want to “dig deep” • Arnie: Check on posting minutes from technical working group • Arnie: Bring information describing what’s included in existing Article 33 (for fish and wildlife) and other agreements re: flood control • Arnie: Bring status and content of current Corps of Engineers Flood agreement • Each person will bring that agency’s/organization’s mandates/policies to share with team • Everyone: Review list of issues and interests that Arnie handed out. The meeting started at 3:05 p.m. and ended at 5:00 p.m. MEETING AGENDA 1. Welcome BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  Introductions Review Baker Relicense Structure and Baker Solution Team Mission Set team mission statement Who else should be on the team? Set social and logistical norms Set agenda for the next meeting Evaluate meeting  INTRODUCTIONS After the welcome, members introduced themselves and stated why they were here: Gary: Fish and wildlife at Skagit and Baker Basin (Protect, perpetuate and preserve, fish and their habitats Polly: River frontage and represent Puget Sound Anglers and Wildcat Steelheaders Arnie: Represent PSE and bring knowledge/history of fisheries at Baker River Project Paula: Representing the Town of Concrete Stan: Treaty protected fish, wildlife, and cultural resources in Skagit and Baker Basin Dick: Fidalgo Fly fishers- curiosity to preserve fishing as a recreational sport Reed: Park’s interests in Aquatic resources Jerry: Instream flows, water flows and levels downstream, out of stream water diversions, and water rights Bob: Effects of Project operations on river/Lower Baker and Skagit River Kathy: Effects on national forest resources and Skagit River Derek: Get more information about Project Cary: To float among groups, bring history and policy perspective, make sure project is economically viable. Arn: Concern re; Chinook/Dams Carol: Understand the process, to enhance protect fish /habitat  BAKER RELICENSE STRUCTURE Arnie Aspelund reviewed the structure of the Baker Relicense Project. Timeline: By late summer, the Overview Team will ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for permission to use the alternative “collaborative” licensing procedure. Puget Sound Energy (PSE) will submit the license application to FERC on or before April 30, 2004. Structure: The Overview team is made up of those who attend the public meetings on the subject of the Baker Relicense. These members have selected which working groups they are interested in joining. There are 6 working groups representing various topic areas. Each working group may have one or more technical working groups to provide specific technical input to the working teams. All working groups will provide recommendations to the Baker Solution Team which will be formed in October, 2000. The Baker Solution Team will integrate and balance the recommendations it receives from the working groups in order to formulate a mutually agreed-upon license application to submit to FERC.  BAKER SOLUTION TEAM MISSION STATEMENT  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests.” DRAFT MISSION STATEMENT The team came up with the following rough draft of a mission statement: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing fisheries and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” The team will review/revise this statement at the start of the next meeting. OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP US Fish and Wildlife Service National Marine Fisheries Service MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team: 1. Meet the afternoon of the second Thursday of the month from 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. (next few meetings are June 8 and July 13, August 10, September 14 in Mount Vernon) 2. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 3. If miss, let team leader know, send representative if possible (prep them first) 4. No backing up for late comers. 5. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes 6. Begin each meeting with review/amendments of minutes. 7. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 8. No physical/psychological violence (no poke in the eye/cheap shots) 9. No official quorum. 10. Average a 10-15 minute break half way through. 11. PSE will bring treats (fruit, cookies, juice, and coffee). 12. If get to points of disagreement, may need to “park” ideas and move on. The minutes would reflect the disagreement. 13. Have report from technical working groups as a regular part of the agenda 14. “Teamlets” will do lots of work outside of the meeting and come back and share with the larger team. 15. Humor is good! 16. Avoid side conversations. 17. Listen to each other. 18. Celebrate diverse opinions. 19. Keep an open mind. 20. Be honest and kind at the same time. 21. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 22. Have fun. 23. Don’t interrupt each other. 24. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 25. Decisions will be made by consensus where possible. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   26. Share data and information. 27. Define acronyms. 28. Have a facilitator present. 29. Do active listening (paraphrase back). 30. If can’t make a meeting, notify team leader (Arnie) by email a.s.a.p. 31. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 32. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. 33. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members within 3 working days. 34. PSE will e-mail the first round of minutes to team members. Members will e-mail their comments to Arnie within 5 working days of receiving them. Team leader will then post them on the web. REPORT FROM BAKER PROJECT DOWNSTREAM FISH PASSAGE TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP The focus of the group was broadened from Lower Baker fish passage to include downstream fish passage for the entire Baker Project. This group began meeting to address early implementation of replacement facilities for Lower Baker fish attraction barge (also referred to as “gulper”). The early implementation is now off the table because the scope has expanded to include the entire downstream passage. Minutes from this team will be available on the web at bakerriverproject.com. PARKING LOT Forest Service (Brady Green) will present summary of watershed analysis possibly at the August meeting TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING June 8, 2000 Agenda 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Status report from technical working team? 7. Background information: • Reports from agencies/organizations on their mandates/policies • Gary: Baker Sockeye • PSE: Fish History (this will also be placed on the web when it is available) 8. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 9. Set agenda for next meeting 10. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4    2000aquatic20000518.pdf en 