 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group November 21, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action items…Wrap up definition of primary (archeological) APE 3. Continue fleshing out interests/issues 4. Set agenda for December 12 meeting 5. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group November 21, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Rob Whitlam, by phone, (Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Committee), Shari Brewer (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Jan Hollenbeck (USDA Forest Service), Gail Boggs, John Boggs, (Town of Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Alex Maass (Historical Research Associates), Ardis Bynum, by phone, (US Forest Service) Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 1:20 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS? Future meeting dates: December 12, 2000 from 1:00-4:00 p.m. at Skagit Tribal Community Center January 9, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon Possible field trip on February 8 February 13, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon March 13, from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Give comments on research design to Gail prior to the next meeting, if possible. • ALL: Review list of Issues and Interests. Call Jessie by December 8th with additions/changes. • HRA: Contact Bob Mierendorf re: deposition/erosion/submerged stumps, etc. (his study at Ross Lake) • HRA: Bring draft of “Unanticipated Discovery Plan” from other projects for this team to consider. This could be part of ongoing orientation program for new employees. • PSE : Send copies of research design to interested parties not present at this meeting. Meeting Agenda for November 21, 2000 PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1:00 to 4:00 1. Introductions 2. Review notes/agenda 3. Presentation on Archaeological Research Design 4. Finish interests/issues 5. Set agenda, location for December 12th meeting 6. Evaluate meeting HRA PRESENTATION of PROPOSED RESEARCH DESIGN Gail presented an overview of the laws, requirements and work required regarding cultural resources in the Baker Project. She acknowledged that the Area of Potential Effects (APE) is yet undefined. The research design acknowledges that all team members agree that it should include the area below the reservoir shoreline. They are hoping to take advantage of the recent dry weather and low drawdown of the lakes (especially Lake Shannon). It was noted that our APE will be changed/expanded by how it is defined and the associated impacts of the other Working Groups (e.g. Recreation). In the meantime, we need a research design to guide how and where the archaeological field survey will be done. A desire was expressed to be aware of opportunities to protect archaeological sites that may be exposed at the extra low drawdown. We may need to put together an “Unanticipated Discovery Plan”. Some team members suggested creating an archaeological district that would protect important archaeological sites in lowland and upland areas. They also emphasized the importance of the mountain goat. Mountain goats are culturally significant to the Tribes. In Bob Mierendorf studies, mountain goat remains have been documented in certain locations in the Ross Lake area. In locating prehistoric sites along Baker and Shannon Lakes, additional places to look would be on routes/sites adjacent to known historic mountain goat areas. The Forest Service would like the research design to address all areas within Forest Service land. They hope to issue one permit and not go through many iterations. The Forest Service owns all the land BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 2 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 surrounding Baker Lake. A comparable permit is not needed for Lake Shannon since it is mainly surrounded by private land. Laws and Regulations NHPA Section 106, 36 CFR Part 800, FERC counterpart regulations (there are others that don’t need to be discussed now). Requirements Inventory Evaluation for NHRP Project impacts Mitigation and management plan Resources Involved Archaeological sites (prehistoric and historic) Historical building and structures Traditional cultural properties Archaeological Work Define APE (have been doing; agreement on drawdown areas, continue discussing other areas) Conduct background research Perform field survey Test sites as needed Determine NRHP eligibility Evaluate impacts Plan mitigation and management measures Research Design Needed to guide archaeological field survey (and general aspects of testing) GOALS The cultural resources goals are structured by the requirements of the FERC relicensing process, which satisfy Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended, and its implementing regulations, “Protection of Historic Properties” (36 CFR Part 800). The goals are: (1) inventorying the archaeological resources of the Project area, (2) evaluating the National Register-eligibility of the archaeological resources, and (3) using the collected inventory and evaluation data, along with information on Project impacts, to develop a program that will guide the management of these resources during the period of operations to be addressed by the new license. The resulting program will be a part of the Cultural Resources Management Plan for the Baker River Hydroelectric Project. Alex Maass from HRA presented the draft research design. She discussed the relationship between landform classes and the probability (high, medium. low) of finding archaeological resources in each BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 3 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 class. A percentage of each probability group will be surveyed. She also discussed the estimated amount of acreage to be covered. The research design that Alex handed out discusses these points and how the survey will be conducted. It also provides background information on aspects of the environment, the culture history of the area, and the recorded archaeological resources. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS All: Reviewed draft of archeological research design received from Gail prior to next meeting. Jessie : Continued to follow up re: transmission lines. • Was archeological research done at time of putting in the new road? • Are there culturally modified cedar stumps/groves? • Is the road open to the public? • How is maintenance for power lines being performed? • Can one burn under power line? (to re-establish berries) • Check in with the team leader of Recreation Group re: impacts from dispersed campsites and locations of those sites. • Look at setting up meeting at tribal locations Lyn: Requested of Fish & Wildlife and other Working Groups that they devote time in meetings for presentations by tribes. All groups were very positive about having the presentations. Working Group Team leaders are contacting Jessie to schedule the presentations in the December/January time frame. Tribes may also (or instead) choose to present at the next public meeting instead of to each individual Working Group. AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECT (APE) • Discussion of the APE was deferred to the December meeting. ISSUES/INTERESTS Team members reviewed the previously defined list of Issues and Interests and Possible Solutions. Representatives signed up for each interest that they felt belonged to their organization. Team members were asked to let Jessie know by December 8 of any changes they would like to see so they can be shared at the Solution Team Meeting on December 13. The new list, showing “owners” of the interests is attached. MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Got both Rob and Ardis on phone • Ardis knows the full moon schedule (thanks to Peace Corps Calendar) • Food, lively exchange on variety of topics • Good review of report • Good attendance • Loved the map Opportunities for Improvement: • Started late/ended late BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 4 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Note: Meetings in 2001 will occur the second Tuesday of each month from 1:00-4:00 p.m. AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING Agenda for December 12, 2000 Meeting (1:00 - 4:00 p.m.) – Skagit Tribal Community Center ( Jessie will notify members of directions) 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Tribal presentations 4. Action items - Research design - APE 5. Expectations 6. Set agenda for next meeting, January 9, 2001 7. Evaluate meeting *Possible field trip on February 8 to take advantage of full moon. PARKING LOT • Decide how to handle action items (open/closed, etc.) • Show map of general project area, include transmission lines • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Define “cultural resources” in consultation with Tribes and public • Quorum? • Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests • Rotate meeting location to tribal facility? • Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations (Rick to share existing information analysis) • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources • Show map of general project area – does it include transmission lines? • Bob Barnes will give a course on Hydrology 101 • Tribe presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources • Upland area---importance of mountain goats BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 5 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  