BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Meeting May 23, 2000 3:00 p.m. <ad> 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 (map attached) Agenda 1. Welcome & Introductions 2. Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: "To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is costeffective and consistent with public interests." 3. Set working group social and logistical norms. 4. Identify others who should participate in the group. 5. Set agenda for next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Page 1 of 1  file://N:\Baker Relicense\Website Information\Files for web site\map.gif  4/28/2000   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group May 23, 2000 3:00 p.m. <ad> 5:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy) (425) 462-3552, cdrech@puget.com  PRESENT  Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation), Dan Haas (National Park Service), Lynn Mills (Puget Sound Energy), Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group), Kathy Anderson (US Forest Service), Curt Miller (Miller Consulting), Leslie Finlayson (National Park Service), Ken Wilcox (Osprey Environmental Services, Inc.), Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  ACTION ITEMS <b7> Chris D. will contact other potential stakeholders and invite them to the next meeting <b7> Jim to give copy of FERC recreation guidelines to Chris D who will bring copies for all to the next meeting. <b7> Chris D. to bring in FERC definition of consensus <b7> Everyone: Consider meeting location for July. PSE Everett Office? <b7> Everyone: Review list of issues and interests that Chris handed out. The meeting started at 3:10 p.m. and ended at 5:10 p.m.  MEETING AGENDA 1. Welcome 2. Introductions 3. Review Baker Relicense Structure and Baker Solution Team Mission  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   4. Set working group statement 5. Who else should be on the team? 6. Set social and logistical norms 7. Set agenda for the next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS After the welcome, members introduced themselves and stated why they were here: Chris D: Coordinator, team leader, representing PSE's interests re: recreation Jamie: Help the group in the relicensing effort Chris L: Technical support Jim: Representing State's interests (as per State's Comprehensive Outdoor Recreation Plan) Leslie: Learning experience Dan: Representing the public interest (Dept. of the Interior - NPS) Lynn: Current Maintenance Supervisor at the Baker Project, also head of PSE's Recreational Business Unit for the Resort, Lodge, etc. Curt: Landscape architect, recreational, visual, cultural resources Ken: Involved with Mountaineers, hiking. Also an environmental/recreational planner experienced with relicensing efforts. Kathy: Hydropower Coordinator for the Forest Service BAKER RELICENSE STRUCTURE Chris reviewed the structure of the Baker Relicense Project. Timeline: By late summer, the Overview Team will ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for permission to use the alternative "collaborative" licensing procedure. Puget Sound Energy (PSE) will submit the license application to FERC on or before April 30, 2004. Structure: The Overview team is made up of those who attend the public meetings on the subject of the Baker Relicense. These members have selected which working groups they are interested in joining. There are 6 working groups representing various topic areas. Each working group may have one or more technical working groups to provide specific technical input to the working teams. All working groups will provide recommendations to the Baker Solution Team which will be formed in October 2000. The Baker Solution Team will integrate and balance the recommendations it receives from the working groups in order to ["try to" <ad> Dan Haas addition] formulate a mutually agreed-upon license application to submit to FERC. BAKER SOLUTION TEAM MISSION STATEMENT "To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests." DRAFT WORKING GROUP MISSION STATEMENT The team came up with the following rough draft of a mission statement:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   "To develop recommendations for recreation and aesthetic resources in the vicinity of the Baker River Project and in relation to the project and its operations which are consistent with FERC guidelines and appropriately serve the public."  Working notes: To manage the Baker River landscape in a manner that will protect the quality of intrinsic scenic values... These recommendations include: <b7> recognition that recreation enjoys equal consideration with all other resource areas <b7> recognition of the issues, resources, and opportunities that are there <b7> a set of actions that address the issues  The team will review/revise this statement at the start of the next meeting.  OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP North Cascade Institute Skagit and Whatcom Counties User Groups <b7> Outfitter Guides <b7> Other organizations <b7> Users Town of Concrete  MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team:  1. Meet the mornings (for now) from 10:00 to 1:00 p.m. (exception is June meeting which starts at 9:00). ["Consider evening meetings in the future to better accommodate the public"- Ken Wilcox addition] 2. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 3. If missing a meeting, let team leader know, send representative if possible (prep them first) 4. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 5. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. 6. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members within 3 working days. 7. PSE will e-mail the first round of minutes to team members. Members will e-mail their comments to the team leader within 7 working days of receiving them. Team leader will then post them on the web. 8. No backing up for late comers. 9. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 10. Average a 10-15 minute break half way through. 11. PSE will bring treats (carbs, juice, and coffee). 12. Recommendations will not be represented as decisions. 13. Recommendations will be made by FERC's definition of consensus. 14. Don't dominate. 15. Avoid side conversations.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   16. Listen to each other. 17. Celebrate diverse opinions. 18. Keep an open mind. 19. Be honest and kind at the same time. 20. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 21. Have fun. 22. Don't interrupt each other. 23. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 24. Have a facilitator present. PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals Need to operationally define "vicinity" <b7> watershed? <b7> water view? July or August tour of Baker Project? TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING June 15, 2000 Agenda 9:00 to noon at PSE Mt. Vernon Office 1. Introductions 2. Review/revise agenda 3. Review action items 4. Review/revise/complete mission statement 5. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 6. Review/amend/add to meeting norms <b7> establish regularly scheduled meeting times, dates, locations 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4    2000recreational20000523.pdf en 