BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Hydrological & Water Resources Working Group June 8, 2000 9:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way, Mount Vernon, WA  AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review action items 4. Review/revise/complete mission statement 5. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 6. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Hydrological & Water Resources Working Group June 8, 2000 9:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Bob Barnes (Puget Sound Energy) (425) 462-3096, rbarne@puget.com PRESENT Jon Vanderheyden (USDA- Forest Service), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Bob Newman (WA Dept. of Ecology), Jerry Louthain Consultant to City of Anacortes, and Skagit PUD (Economic & Engineering Services, Inc.), Jon Riedel (North Cascades N. Park), Reed Glesne (National Park Service), Polly Fischer (Puget Sound Anglers), Bob Barnes (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) ACTION ITEMS • Bob will contact list of folks who should participate on the team and share: • Team mission statement • Team minutes • Baker River Website • Ask how they’d like to be kept in the loop • Polly will contact the Fidalgo Fly Fishers, Wildcat Steelheaders, and Puget Sound Anglers and do the same. • Bob will make post suggested changes to the minutes as the final version of the May 18 meeting. • All: NOTE CHANGE IN LOCATION OF JULY 13 MEETING! (Sedro Woolley) The meeting started at 9:37 a.m.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   AGENDA REVIEW The team reviewed the agenda. MEETING AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review/approve meeting notes from 5/18/2000 3. Introductions 4. Review/revise/complete mission statement 5. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 6. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting, including location and time 9. Evaluate meeting MINUTES REVIEW The minutes were amended to reflect Jerry Louthain’s clients. They were also amended to label the Baker Solution Team Mission Statement as “DRAFT”. We added location and time under tentative agenda for next meeting. INTRODUCTIONS The team welcomed Polly Fischer, homeowner and member of the Puget Sound Anglers. They also welcomed Jon Vanderheyden from the USDA- Forest Service. FINAL TEAM MISSION STATEMENT The team revised the draft mission statement to read as follows: “To identify issues and develop recommendations that provide for the protection and management of water quality, watershed processes, and hydrologic regimes associated with the Baker River Project that address the social, economic, terrestrial, and aquatic values they affect.” The team will review/revise this statement at the start of the next meeting. WHO ELSE SHOULD BE INVOLVED? In order for the team to successfully accomplish its mission, it was suggested that the following entities participate: USGS (as a resource) Natural Resource Conservation Service Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group Town of Concrete Dept. of Natural Resources (Aquatic) Corps of Engineers NMFS Seattle City Light USFWS County (including beneficiaries of flood protection) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   American Rivers ACTION ITEMS Bob talked with Wayne Wagner (Corps). Wayne doesn’t see the Corps taking an active role in this process because they are sticking with the existing license language (article 32) as it pertains to flood control. They will be a resource for the team. Gary paraphrased an ecology sample goal statement as an FYI for the team: “To develop an agreement that addresses relicensing of the Baker River Hydroelectric Project consistent with the agencies’ legislative mandates, policies, and applicable laws and the interests of all parties.” Bob B. Distributed the whole License Agreement for the Baker Project, along with two supplemental agreements: 1) The Corps flood control agreement (starts about half way back) 2) Operation of Spawning Beaches (WDFW) MEETING NORMS The team revised the norms for the team. Changes are bolded. They will continue to revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team: 1. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 2. Meet the morning of the second Thursday of the month from 9:30 to 12:30. (next two meetings are June 8 and July 13.) [Delete specific meeting dates] 3. About a 10 minute break half way through. 4. PSE will bring treats (morning: fruit and pastries and coffee; afternoons: cookies, brownies, and coffee). 5. May need to “park” ideas and move on. 6. “Caucus” outside of meetings. 7. “Teamlets” will do lots of work outside of the meeting and come back and share with the larger team. 8. Humor is okay! 9. Avoid side conversations. 10. Keep and open mind. 11. Be honest and kind at the same time. 12. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 13. Have fun. 14. Decisions will be made by consensus where possible. 15. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team is talk over 3 minutes. 16. If on a hot topic, the team will ask for permission to continue the discussion perhaps past the scheduled end of the meeting. 17. No backing up for late comers. 18. Use “buddy system” to catch up absent members. 19. If can’t make a meeting, notify Bob B. by email a.s.a.p. 20. Bob B. will communicate to the team if there is a change ion the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 21. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   22. The minutes will be posted on the web within 3 working days. 23. PSE will email draft and final minutes to team members. Members will email their comments on draft to Bob within 5 working days of receiving them. Bob will then post them on the web. 24. We will try to schedule these meetings on the same day as the Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Working Group. ISSUES/INTERESTS The team reviewed the list of issues developed at the April 26 Overview Team Meeting. Interests • Protection, preservation, perpetuation, of fish and wildlife in their natural habitat • Fish don’t get stranded • Economic viability • Flood control • Fulfilling legal mandates (CWA, CZMA, FPA) • Combo of CWA and CZMA, FPA, and ESA, FWCA, Forest and Park, … • Impacts on terrestrial, water quality, aquatic resources, and recreational resources • Loss of spawning habitat • Loss of access to tributaries • Loss of habitat • Protection of life and property • Consequences of operating the reservoir to provide flood protection • Loss of natural stream processes • Protection of existing water rights • Time constraints- I might be left out of the process • Town of Concrete and Skagit Valley municipalities meeting financial and legal responsibilities • Potential loss of cultural, recreational, and natural resources • Drinking water quality Issues • Lake productivity, limnology • Minimum flows • Marine derived nutrients • Ramping rates • Relationship between flood control and water level manipulations for (reservoir) impoundments (ecological considerations) • Erosion • Recreational considerations • Fish migration (upstream and down) • Water releases for restoration projects • Impacts of operation on water flow (moved to issues, from interests) Parking Lot • Communication Plan to enlist “reluctant” members BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   •  • •  Reservoir/watershed: “Hydrology 101” Project description  EVALUATION OF MEETING • Didn’t Start on time • Covered lots of material • Liked Fast Pace • Assign blocks of time for agenda items TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 13, 2000 Agenda 9:30 - 12:30 Park Service/Forest Service HQ 2105 Hwy 20, Sedro Woolley 1. 2. 3. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  Review/revise agenda and minutes Go through action items Discuss communication plan Review process for utilizing Issues and Interest information Continue Interests and Issues Development Break Continue Interests and Issues Development Set agenda, location and time for the next meeting (8/10/00) Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  9:30 - 9:35 9:35 - 9:40 9:40 - 10:00 10:00 - 10:20 10:20 - 11:00 11:00 - 11:10 11:10 - 12:20 12:20 - 12:25 12:25 - 12:30  Page 5    2000water20000608.pdf en 