 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fish & Aquatic Resources Working Group July 13, 2000 1:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. U.S. Forest Service/National Park Service Office 2105 State Route 20 Sedro Woolley, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda and minutes 1:30 – 1:35 2. Action items 1:35 – 2:00 3. Who else should be in the team? 2:00 – 2:10 4. Status report from technical working team 2:10 – 2:25 5. Other organizations mission/ (broad) goals 2:25 – 2:35 6. Interests and issues 2:35 – 3:10 7. Break 3:10 – 3:20 8. Interests and issues 3:20 – 4:20 9. Set agenda for next meeting and schedule for next 3 meetings 4:20 – 4:25 10. Evaluate meeting 4:25 – 4:30 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group July 13, 2000 1:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. U.S. Forest Service/National Park Service Office 2105 State Route 20 Sedro Woolley, WA MEETING NOTES LOCATION OF SEPTEMBER 14 MEETING WILL BE: PSE Office in Mount Vernon, unless another location is specified later (PSE is looking into locations having expanded meeting rooms). Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund (425) 462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT Jon Vanderheyden (USDA- Forest Service), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Jerry Louthain, Consultant to City of Anacortes, and Skagit PUD (Economic & Engineering Services, Inc.), Reed Glesne (National Park Service), Polly Fischer (Puget Sound Anglers), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Carol Bordin (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelheaders), Dick Raisler, (Fidalgo Flyfishers), Marie Phillips (Concrete School District), Steve Jennison (WA Dept. of Natural Resources), Don Schluter, by conference phone (Trout Unlimited), Fred Seavey (US Fish and Wildlife), Brady Green, (US Forest Service), Chuck Ebel (US Army Corps of Engineers), Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) ACTION ITEMS • Those contacting “would-be participants” should inform them of the mission statement, minutes, schedule, web-site, and ask for the appropriate contact person and invite them to the meetings. • Everyone with a potential interested party should give that party’s contact information to Arnie so he can add them to his electronic distribution list. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 1 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Organization Contact Person NMFS Steve Fransen USFWS Fred Seavey (attending) Corps of Engineers Chuck Ebel (attending) WA Dept of Transportation Gary Davis (Environmental Resource Group) Interagency Commission Outdoor Recreation Jim Eychaner Skagit Conservation District Carol Bordin will give contact info to Arnie Washington Trout Kurt Bearsdlee Trout Unlimited Don Schluter (attended by phone!) American Rivers Rob Masonis Seattle City Light Dave Pflug Other area towns Arnie Aspelund still to contact Department of Natural Resources Steve Jennison (attending) Community Trade and Economic Development Rod Sakrison still to contact Gary: - Get harvest numbers - Bring copy of sockeye presentation Nick - Provide copies of CDs of Baker River Fish Document for all members Arnie - Type up list of additional issues and interests he receives from team members between July 13 and Labor Day. He will e-mail the list to team members prior to the next meeting and bring hard copies with him. - Talk with Bob Barnes about possibility of having the next meeting at the Skagit PUD (providing they have conference call capabilities) - Contact area towns about their participation in the process - Bring hard copies of this group’s minutes and those of the Technical Working Group - Bring information on past mitigation Arnie/Nick - Work with Bob Barnes to schedule details of August 10 project tour. Rod - Contact Community Trade & Economic Development (CTED) Bill R. - Contact Don Wick of the Economic Development Association or Skagit County and invite him to attend the Economics/Operations Working Group Meetings (2nd Wed. of each month, with the exception of the September meeting which will be the 20th, from 1:30 to 4:30). Carol - Contact SSHEAR (Salmon, Steelhead Habitat Evaluation and Restoration) All - Email additional issues/interests from their organizations to Arnie by Labor Day. He will send back a summary sheet prior to next meeting and also bring hard copies to the next meeting. AGENDA AND MINUTES REVIEW The team reviewed the agenda. ANNOUNCEMENTS The following topics will be covered at the Overview Team Meeting (July 25, from 10:00-noon) at the Cotton Tree Inn in Mt. Vernon, WA: • Working Groups • Solutions Team Formation BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 2 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Process Team Budget It was also announced that there will be a public tour of Baker River Project on Saturday, July 22nd. The tour is filled, however PSE is considering adding a second tour at a later date. Conference call information: Call 360-424-2925 (Barb Gassler-PSE, Mt. Vernon Office). Leave your phone # and the team will call you for conference call if you are unable to attend a meeting but would like to participate. JULY 13, 2000 MEETING AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Action Items 4. Itinerary of Baker River Project Tour 5. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 6. Status report from Technical Working Group 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS Participants each introduced themselves. New attendees were: Marie Phillips (Concrete School District), Steve Jennison (WA Dept. of Natural Resources), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited), Fred Seavey (US Fish and Wildlife), Brady Green, (US Forest Service), Chuck Ebel (US Corps of Engineers). Welcome! The team suggested that the Hydrological Working Group contact the Skagit Conservation District (for agriculture representation). Also, invite Bob Rose of Skagitonians for the Protection of Farmland to attend that working group. In the future, give Arnie all contact information for other interested parties. TOUR FOR HYDROLOGICAL AND FISH RESOURCES WORKING GROUP The team decided to do their tour on August 10, 2000. They will meet at the PSE office and Visitor Center in Concrete at 9:00. They will finish around 6:00 p.m. SUGGESTED TOUR AGENDA 1. Mouth of Baker River • See Lower Baker Channel • Adult Fish Trap • Lower Baker Powerhouse • Lower Baker Dam - LB Gulper - Net pens 2. Upper Baker • UB Powerhouse and Dam BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 3 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • West Pass Dike • Depression Lake • UP Gulper • New Spawning Beach (4) • Trout Pond • Water Intake for Fish Facilities 3. Baker Lake • Delta and drawdown zone—(shoreline) • Baker River • Old spawning beach (1-3) • Boulder Creek • Baker Lake Fish Release Site (Blue Tarp) • Relationship to Mt. Baker • Road network in Basin/Watershed • Camping impacts to fish/water quality and shore erosion (Shannon Creek) 4. Other Hydro Plants • Koma Kulshan Power House UPDATE FROM TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP This team started in March of this year. They are working on downstream fish passage facilities at Upper & Lower Baker. They are currently amassing baseline information and looking at data needs to be collected that would impact design at range of options. Preliminary estimates for the gulper option range from $3MM to $9MM. Preliminary estimates for V Screens range from $65MM to $104MM. They are trying to get the percentage of passage to above 95%. The design is focused on Chinook (weakest fish). There was concern that the Technical Working Group may be too narrow in its scope. For example, they should include non-game species. Their minutes are available on the Web site. They will also be distributed at the September 14, 2000 meeting. BAKER RIVER FISH DOCUMENT UPDATE The Baker River fish document is complete. Nick is duplicating CDs for all team members. It was suggested that PSE provide a few paper copies that could reside in a library for review. ISSUES/INTERESTS A listing of interests was begun from the discussion of mission statements and goals. Early on, team members decided to suspend with the exercise of attempting to separate issues from interests and elected to brainstorm as follows: • Direct/indirect effects on Skagit Wild Scenic River – fish, wildlife, recreation, aesthetics, etc. • Improve downstream, upstream and reservoir fish passage at Project • Sustainable levels of anadromous fish stocks to historical levels (to support both fisheries and ecological concerns) • Sockeye production potential • Improve fish passage and production facilities/operations to meet current/future fish management objectives (also including natural production in all life cycle stages) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 4 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Quantifying project impacts related to flow/habitat/fish downstream of Project including Baker River and area of Project influence on Skagit River • Quantifying project impacts to State-owned aquatic land (past/present/future) • Education/Interpretation/Outreach • Educate youth as present and future citizens who value and protect water quality and all species • Have in the field and stream studies (for students) and historical research with application of academic skills to the process (for educational purposes) • Develop partnerships with PSE and other interested parties in the relicensing process • Restoration of resident fish species (native resident) • Maintaining and restoring native populations and natural processes • Maintain ecological relationships in the watershed • To protect, preserve and perpetuate fish and wildlife in their natural habitats • Promote ethical sport fishing • To manage treaty protected fisheries resources for 3 tribes along the Skagit Basin. • Provide adequate in-stream flows to protect, preserve and perpetuate fish and wildlife in their natural habitat. • All fish, all waters • Natural spawning (not hatchery production) • Loss of fish habitat (from reservoir) • Protection, acquisition (of land), restoration, and enhancement of fish habitat (multiple species) • Ramping rates • Volitional release- both upstream and downstream of salmon and trout (residential and other) • Complete IFIM studies (Instream Flow Incremental Methodology) – include both Baker and Skagit Rivers • 401 certification • Meet water quality requirements • Supplementation programs dealing with brood stocking with only species of origin of that watershed or an adjacent watershed • Recover listed species (endangered) • Concern with recreational pressure on sockeye. • Review exotic species (e.g., Tigermuskies) and non-native hybrid trout/salmon/plantings in the watershed • Coordination of flows in the Skagit River with the Skagit River Project Parking Lot • Watershed Analysis- presentation by Brady Green at a date to be defined later • We need a strategy to integrate this analysis into the process • Feedback on “Salmon on the Baker River” document • Different perspectives • Post reviews on web? • Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) at a date to be defined later BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 5 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Meeting Handouts • June 8, 2000 meeting minutes • Baker working group final mission statements • List of Interest and Issues from April 26, 2000 Public Information Meeting Evaluation of Meeting Well-Dones: Don’s participation on phone Humor Opportunities to Improve: Started a few minutes late Ran over by a few minutes Have people identify themselves when speaking to person on phone (conference call) TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING September 14, 2000 Agenda 1:30 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. PSE Office in Mount Vernon, unless another location is specified! 1. Review/revise agenda and minutes 2. Introduce new members 3. Action Items • Debrief the tour- Do we need another day? • Look at matter of documentation 4. Who else should be in the team? 5. Status report from technical working team • Discuss minutes, scope, and direction 6. Interests and Issues • Review list of additional issues/interests that members sent to Arnie since the last meeting 7. Set agenda for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 6 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  