BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group June 20, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 7. Set agenda for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural and Historical Resources Working Group June 20, 2000 1:00 p.m. <ad> 4:00 p.m. PSE Office at 1700 College Way, Mt. Vernon  MEETING NOTES PRESENT Kathy Anderson (US Forest Service), Gail Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum), John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 1:14 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. PARKING LOT <b7> Decide how to handle action items (open/closed, etc.) <b7> Develop "Area of Potential Effects" Map <b7> Define "cultural resources" in consultation with Tribes and public <b7> Quorum? <b7> Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests <b7> Rotate meeting location to tribal facility <b7> Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations (Rick M. from Forest Service to share existing information analysis) <b7> Glossary of terms: what are "protection," "mitigation," and "enhancement"? <b7> Gail T. to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources <b7> Show map of general project area - does it include transmission lines? ACTION ITEMS <b7> Connie will discuss tribal consultation procedure with strategy team <b7> Connie will contact Larry and do follow up phone calls to Jason, Scott, Saul, Rick R. at Town of Concrete, Bob M. at Park Service  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   <b7> Connie will send letter of invitation to Skagit County Historical Museum <b7> John to check with Skagit County re: their participation (Planning Dept. Skagit County Historical Society) <b7> Connie will send letter and follow up phone call to Nooksack, Lummi, N'lakapamux, Samish <b7> Connie will put State Historic Preservation office contact, Rob Whitlam, on meeting minutes distribution list MEETING AGENDA COMPLETION STATUS 1. Review agenda 2. Introductions 3. Finalize team mission statement (see above) 4. Determined who else should be on the team? <b7> Connie distributed the master list of everyone who indicated interest in this working group; additions were made to list (see below) <b7> Team discussed ways to consult with tribes-The Forest Service, in addition to public scoping notices and meetings for project planning, requests consultation with each potentially affected tribe. When consultation meetings are held, they are at a location of tribal choice and are one-to-one consultation, with a purpose of hearing that tribe's concerns with the proposed activity. PSE will consider following this model. 5. Set social and logistical norms - removed duplicate of "long speeches," added to #17 6. Reviewed and added to list of interests/issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting 7. Set agenda for the next meeting 8. Connie stated that there is a public tour of the Baker River Project on July 22nd; the Overview Team will meet again on July 25th at Cottontree Inn in Mount Vernon from 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon. 9. Evaluated meeting OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP Upper Skagit Sauk-Suiattle Nooksack Samish N'lakapamux National Park Service State Historic Preservation Office Skagit County Historical Museum Jason Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Tribe) Scott Schuyler (Skagit System Cooperative) Saul Weisberg (North Cascades Institute) MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team:  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   1. Meet the afternoon of the third Tuesday of the month from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m. at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon. The next few meetings will be June 20, July 18 (at Forest Service office in Sedro-Woolley), field trip on August 15th to Baker River Project. 2. Meetings will start and end on time. (Exceptions will be made as agreed to by team.) 3. If miss, let team leader know (email or phone), send representative if possible (prep them first). 4. No backing up for late comers. 5. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes. 6. Begin each meeting with quick review of changes to the minutes. 7. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 8. Average a 15-minute break approximately half way through. 9. PSE will bring treats (fruit, cookies, juice, water, and coffee). 10. Confidential information will not be posted. 11. When appropriate, preface remarks "This is confidential..." 12. Avoid lengthy independent discussions. 13. We are making recommendations, not decisions. 14. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. 15. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, parking lot, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. 16. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members soon after the meeting. 17. Members will E-mail their comments to Connie within five working days of receiving the minutes. After review process; she will then post the final minutes on the web and E-mail to team members. 18. Listen to each other. 19. Celebrate diverse opinions. 20. Keep an open mind. 21. Be honest and kind at the same time. 22. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 23. Have fun. 24. Don't interrupt each other. 25. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 26. Recommendations will be made by consensus where possible. MEETING PROCESS CHECK <b7> Stayed on schedule very well <b7> Cooperative <b7> Got through agenda <b7> Need more participation; our group got smaller rather than larger <b7> Gayla is good addition <b7> Great facilitation - good wording on flip charts <b7> Food AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 18th, 2000 (1:00 - 4:00 p.m.) - Forest Service office, Sedro Woolley Agenda  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   1. Review agenda 2. Action items 3. Discuss "field trip" specifics in August 4. Continue fleshing out interests/issues 5. Set agenda for next meeting 6. Evaluate meeting DRAFT ISSUES/INTERESTS Cultural & Historical Working Group 1. Showcase up-river history Interest (1) - Local residents feel they have been forgotten Interest (2) - Quality of life maintained and enhanced; sense of community Interest (3) - Need to preserve history Develop exhibits to show history of area - past, present and future <b7> Consider local values in setting priorities <b7> Research & priorities should address both "local" and tribal prehistory, history and current Interest (1) - Self-determination (home-grown vs. imposed from outside) Research more about local heritage (including oral history interviews) 2. Explore potential for cultural landscapes in area Interest (1) - Need to tie "cultural landscapes" (if they exist) into the big picture 3. Ensure compliance with federal laws on resource management Survey archeological sites in reservoir drawdown area of potential effects Interest (1) - Inventory cultural, historical and archeological resource in the area of potential effects 4. Explore full range of mitigation measures, such as enhancement of particular resources Develop mitigation and management plan for sites Consider effect & management of resources in a real context 5. Explore cooperative projects with tribes and interest groups (e.g., museums) Interest (1) - Way to get people over the fear of being left out Interest (2) - Don't want to reinvent the wheel 6. Pursue ways to make Baker River a destination Interest (1) - People don't see Baker River area as a worthwhile stop 7. Explore interpretive options (education, interpretation, outreach) Interest (1) - To emphasize the diversity: historic perspective and present day users 8. Coordinate information dispersal Interest (1) - Coordinate interpretive services so they are user-friendly, economic, etc.; avoid conflicting or confusing information (e.g., fish poster) 9. Consult with tribes (government-to-government) - network with tribes (one-on-one) Interest (1) - to have tribal input into the process 10. General Interest (1) To comply with FERC regulations in the most cost effective manner 11. General Interest (2) - We see possible connection to all other working groups. 12. General Interest (3) - To comply with other applicable laws and regulations from relevant jurisdictions (e.g. National Forest Management Act) 13. General Interest (4) - Allow public access to research findings  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4    2000cultural20000620.pdf en 