 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Public Information Meeting April 26, 2000 9:30 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. 6:00 p.m. - 8:30 p.m. Cottontree Inn Concrete High School 2401 Riverside Drive 7830 Superior Avenue Mount Vernon, WA Concrete, WA AGENDA Registration Welcome & Review of March 30, 2000 Meeting Connie Freeland - Licensing Program Manager The Alternative Licensing Procedures - Additional Information Connie Freeland Establishing Working Groups by Resource Areas Connie Freeland Breakout Session - Interests Identification Cary Feldmann - Manager: Environmental Strategies Reconvene/Group Discussion Cary Feldmann Questions & Answers BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE CONTACT INFORMATION Puget Sound Energy has established several methods for interested parties to contact the relicensing team or become involved with the Baker River Project Relicense. If you have a question, comment, request, or would like more information on the relicense, please use any of the following contact methods. MAILING ADDRESS Baker River Project Relicense Puget Sound Energy, Inc. PO Box 97034 OBC-14N Bellevue, WA 98009-9734 MESSAGE LINE 1-888-CALL PSE, option 4, extension 81-3110 EMAIL ADDRESS bakerlicense@puget.com INTERNET WEBSITE ADDRESS http://www.bakerriverproject.com or http://www.pugetsoundenergy.com BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS WORKING GROUP TEAM LEADER DATE & TIME* Fisheries & Aquatic Resources Arnie Aspelund May 18: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Wildlife & Terrestrial Resources Tony Fuchs May 23: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Cultural & Historical Resources Connie Freeland May 25: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Recreational Resources Chris Drechsel May 23: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Hydrological & Water Resources Bob Barnes May 18: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Economics/Operations Charles Morton May 16: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. * All of these first working group meetings will be held at Puget Sound Energy’s Mount Vernon Business office (map and address attached). OBJECTIVES OF FIRST WORKING GROUP MEETINGS 1. Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests.” 2. Set working group social and logistical norms. 3. Identify others who should participate in the group. 4. Set agenda for next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Improved public education, outreach, & interpretation Improve & create back country trails - system of trails - loop systems More trails in more developed areas Use Concrete, WA as a focal point for trail access Create water trail system Develop scenic/aesthetic management objectives and management strategies to meet the objectives Improve the identification of all recreational opportunities (basin wide) Develop education & interpretive plan to include specific resource area information. Develop ways to implement & sustain the plan Leverage existing resources for education Develop public communication system Identification of private lands around reservoir Provide access to Lake Shannon Low level hiking opportunity Improve access to rock climbing areas in order to improve safety Improve recreational fishing opportunities Viewing of spawning fish Possible relocation and/or expansion of existing interpretive facilities BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 1 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting (cont.) Cultural & Historical Working Group Showcase up-river history Explore potential for cultural landscapes in area Ensure compliance with federal laws on resource management Explore full range of mitigation measures, such as enhancement of particular resources Explore cooperative projects with other interest groups (tribes, museum groups,...) Pursue ways to make Baker River a destination Explore interpretive options (education, interpretation, outreach) Coordinate information dispersal Develop exhibits to show history of area - past, present, future Research more about local heritage (including oral history interviews) Encourage tribal participation (government to government)- network with tribes (one-on-one) Survey archaeological sites in reservoir drawdown areas & shorelines Develop mitigation & management plan for sites Consider effect & management of resources in areal context Consider local values in setting priorities Research & priorities should address both “local” and tribal prehistory, history & current BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 2 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting (cont.) Fisheries & Aquatic Resources Working Group Appropriate representation by fish management authority/Federal, State, Tribes, (PFMC), Local Govts, NGO’s Meet Aquatic Conservation Strategy of National Forest Plan. Biodiversity - emphasis on native species. Direct/indirect effects on Skagit Wild Scenic River – fish, wildlife, recreation, aesthetics, etc Improve downstream, upstream and reservoir fish passage at project Sustainable levels of anadromous fish stocks to historical levels. Increasing sockeye production potential (fertilization) Increase/maintain recreational access on reservoirs Improve fish passage & production facilities/operations to meet current/future fish management objectives Quantifying project impacts related to flow/habitat/fish downstream of Project including Baker River and area of project influence on Skagit River. (Flow coordination - IFIM –from dam to confluence & beyond Quantifying project impacts to state owned Aquatic Land (past/present/future) Education/Interpretation/outreach Restoration Resident Fish species Having clean water (Baker River discharge) - Municipal cooperation on City of Concrete sewage treatment plant -Flow coordination -Flow control Sustained economic benefits for city of Concrete-as they relate to fisheries In concert with sockeye, bring back other anadromous fish species using projects such as Little Baker River Channel Project BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 3 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting (cont.) Operations & Economics Working Group Warning system (community) An assessment of structural integrity of various facilities Upper Baker/Lower Baker/fitted/West Pass Dike Project viability Economics of Project 4 (e) conditions & ability to fund Economics of operations of the project & how we compare those to the non-commodity tradeoffs (e.g., aethetics, preservation of historic buildings) Army Corp. involvement Commercial timberland management & how it fits with PSE operations & other uses of resources Develop a process for evaluation of economic impact of various options Over 50 year license, things will change. How will we be able to assess and address future issues Ownership identification of properties in Baker Basin Taxes for Upper Baker go to Whatcom County; however, all support svcs for this portion of project come from Skagit County & Concrete Explore ways to “lure” drive-through traffic from Highway 20, thus providing enhanced economic vitality of the immediate area Exploration of ecotourism and/or other potential economic uses of project area BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 4 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting (cont.) Wildlife & Terrestrial Resources Working Group Noxious Weeds - characterize problem Loss of rare plant habitat Wetland, riparian rare habitats Inundation habitat loss - wetlands, riparian, deer & elk winter range Fluctuating water levels - s&m species & precluding loon and other waterfowl nesting LSR impacts - # of species that can be supported, connectivity edge effect on HS for species (Habitat Suitability) Recreation impacts - Grizzly bear, mountain goat, other Productivity - reduced species compliment & biomass of migratory fish Potential recreational impacts to rare plants, habitats & species Potential impacts to DNR managed trust lands - HCP Public Environmental Education & Outreach - Terr issues Designate areas for specific uses - eg: keep beaver areas for beavers and low impact human use bats & other spp of concern which may be enhanced by project activities ecotourism as means of enhancing wildlife - management of rec/users for enhancement of wildlife (ie. Visitor trail, walkways, interp signs) Promotion of biodiversity - including those other than fish & mammals, ie plants, invertebrates, microb) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 5 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 List of Interests/Issues from April 26th Public Information Meeting (cont.) Hydrological & Water Resources Working Group Flow coordination with upstream mainstem projects on the Skagit River (Ross, Gorge, Diablo). Stated concern is the protection of fisheries and/or other water related values. Flow coordination with downstream water management on the main stem of the Skagit River such as IRPP on mainstem of the Skagit River Degree of Project Impact to mainstem of Skagit River downstream of the Baker River confluence to Sedro Woolley (WDOE) or to delta 401 Water Quality Certification. Scoping, studies, requirements. Slope stability and erosion control at Lake Shannon especially along steeper hill slopes. Erosion control along shoreline at Upper Baker and depositional impacts in lower stream reaches due to loss of hydraulic gradient from reservoir backwater. Flood control impacts and opportunities Dams interrupt downstream transport of large organic debris Flow maintenance for benefiting other downstream water uses and users Potential meeting conflicts with other existing processes (USFS watershed analysis, WRIA 2514 & 2496 for example) Water quality and flow issues regarding the city’s sewage treatment plant discharge into the Baker River. Management of hydro for protection and/or use of cultural and natural resources. Snow chemistry and air pollution impacts to water quality. Do these processes lead to effects that should be considered in reservoir management and operation? Upland [watershed] management influences water quality [quantity?]. Explore potential use of upland [watershed] management for desynchronizing storm flow to assist in flood control. Glacial studies e.g. mass balances and chemistry affect both water quality and quantity. How are these effects accounted for in project operations from both water quality & quantity perspectives? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT page 6 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Public Information Meeting April 26, 2000 9:30 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. 6:00 p.m. - 8:30 p.m. Cottontree Inn Concrete High School 2401 Riverside Drive 7830 Superior Avenue Mount Vernon, WA Concrete, WA Meeting Summary Puget Sound Energy held another two public meetings to initiate the federal relicensing of the Baker River Hydroelectric Project. The purposes of the meetings were to: review key points on the relicensing process and public involvement presented at the earlier meetings, provide additional information on the alternative licensing procedures, discuss setting up working groups by resource areas, and gather in working groups to brainstorm interests of participants. The presentation on the alternative procedures focused on the collaborative nature of the procedures and the requirements for requesting FERC permission to use the procedures, including gaining consensus of stakeholders and preparing a communications protocol for how the licensee, stakeholders and FERC will communicate until the license application is filed in 2004. Information was also provided on the communication tools for the relicense: the internet website, phone message line and email address. Information was presented on the organization and initial meetings of the six working groups: fisheries and aquatic resources, wildlife and terrestrial resources, cultural and historical resources, recreational resources, hydrological and water resources, and economics/operations. At the breakout session, meeting participants moved around the room to the working group stations and listed their interests and issues regarding the various resources. The group then reconvened to summarize the points listed. The next steps for the relicensing process include holding initial meetings of each of the working groups, to set up the procedures they will work by and identify additional participants for the groups. A process working group will also convene to draft the communications protocol. Results of these working groups will be presented at the next public meeting to be held in July. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE CONTACT INFORMATION Puget Sound Energy has established several methods for interested parties to contact the relicensing team or become involved with the Baker River Project Relicense. If you have a question, comment, request, or would like more information on the relicense, please use any of the following contact methods. MAILING ADDRESS Baker River Project Relicense Puget Sound Energy, Inc. PO Box 97034 OBC-14N Bellevue, WA 98009-9734 MESSAGE LINE 1-888-CALL PSE, option 4, extension 81-3110 EMAIL ADDRESS bakerlicense@puget.com INTERNET WEBSITE ADDRESS http://www.bakerriverproject.com or http://www.pugetsoundenergy.com BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS WORKING GROUP TEAM LEADER DATE & TIME* Fisheries & Aquatic Resources Arnie Aspelund May 18: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Wildlife & Terrestrial Resources Tony Fuchs May 23: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Cultural & Historical Resources Connie Freeland May 25: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Recreational Resources Chris Drechsel May 23: 3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Hydrological & Water Resources Bob Barnes May 18: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Economics/Operations Charles Morton May 16: 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. * All of these first working group meetings will be held at Puget Sound Energy’s Mount Vernon Business office (map and address attached). OBJECTIVES OF FIRST WORKING GROUP MEETINGS 1. Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests.” 2. Set working group social and logistical norms. 3. Identify others who should participate in the group. 4. Set agenda for next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  