BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife & Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting May 23, 2000 10:00 a.m. <ad> 12:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 (map attached) Agenda 1. Welcome & Introductions 2. Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: "To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is costeffective and consistent with public interests." 3. Set working group social and logistical norms. 4. Identify others who should participate in the group. 5. Set agenda for next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Page 1 of 1  file://N:\Baker Relicense\Website Information\Files for web site\map.gif  4/28/2000   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group May 23, 2000 The meeting started at 10:10 a.m. and ended at 12:10 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273  MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (Phone) 425-462-3553 (E-mail) tfuchs@puget.com  Attendees:  Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Lauri Vigue (WA Dept. of Fish & Wildlife), Don Gay (US Forest Service), Carl Corey (US Forest Service), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Mike Davison (WA Dept. of Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Bill Rogers (Skagit County Noxious Weed Control Board), Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  ACTION ITEMS <b7> Tony will contact folks who expressed interest in attending this meeting who were not present. <b7> Everyone: Consider meeting location for July. PSE Everett Office? <b7> Tony: Check availability of Everett Office. <b7> Marty: Make a list of available information for the Working Group Library. <b7> Everyone: Review list of issues and interests that Tony handed out.  MEETING AGENDA 1. Welcome 2. Introductions 3. Review Baker Relicense Structure and Baker Solution Team Mission 4. Set team mission statement 5. Who else should be on the team? 6. Set social and logistical norm  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   7. Set agenda for the next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting  INTRODUCTIONS After the welcome, members introduced themselves and stated why they were here:  Patrick: Re: North Cascades National Park Marty: Wildlife consultant to PSE, back-up team leader Tony: PSE's terrestrial biologist, team leader Stan: Treaty protected fish, wildlife, and cultural resources in Skagit and Baker Basin Lauri: Habitat program for WA State Fish and Wildlife Carl: Representing the Forest Service Don: Terrestrial biologist for Mt. Baker Ranger District Mike (District Biologist for WDFW): To represent all vegetarians and non-vegetarians throughout the relicensing effort. (Stan Walsh suggests we do not put humorous entries into the meeting minutes) Bill: Noxious Weeds Control Board  BAKER RELICENSE STRUCTURE Tony Fuchs reviewed the structure of the Baker Relicense Project. Timeline: By late summer, the Overview Team will ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for permission to use the alternative "collaborative" licensing procedure. Puget Sound Energy (PSE) will submit the license application to FERC on or before April 30, 2004. Structure: The Overview team is made up of those who attend the public meetings on the subject of the Baker Relicense. These members have selected which working groups they are interested in joining. There are 6 working groups representing various topic areas. Each working group may have one or more technical working groups to provide specific technical input to the working teams. All working groups will provide recommendations to the Baker Solution Team, which will be formed in October 2000. The Baker Solution Team will integrate and balance the recommendations it receives from the working groups in order to formulate a mutually agreed-upon license application to submit to FERC.  BAKER SOLUTION TEAM MISSION STATEMENT  "To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests."  DRAFT MISSION STATEMENT The team came up with the following rough draft of a mission statement:  "To develop a set of recommendations for terrestrial and wildlife issues associated with the Baker River Project that: 1. accurately defines and describes existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects; 3. leads to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement measures acceptable to all members of this working group; and  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   4. is consistent with the FPA and other local, State, and federal regulations, policies, and land use plans."  Operational definitions that need to be defined: "previous environment", "project boundary", "existing", "mutually acceptable"  The team will review/revise this statement at the start of the next meeting.  OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP North Cascades National Park, City/County, DNR  MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team:  1. Meet the morning of the third Tuesday of each month from 9:30 to 12:30 p.m. The next few meetings are June 20, July 18 (probably at PSE's Everett office), and August 15 in Mount Vernon 2. Where possible, set up meetings at the same day as the Recreation Working Group 3. Meetings will start and end on time. 4. Use consensus decision making where possible. 5. Email/voicemail Tony if can't make a meeting. Tony will contact other team members re: how to proceed. E.g., the team may decide not to meet, to change the meeting location, or to have a technical working group meet instead). 6. Team leader brings extra hard copies of meeting minutes to each meeting. 7. If Tony misses, Marty will act as back-up team leader. 8. If miss, let team leader know, send representative if possible (prep them first). 9. No backing up for late comers. 10. Tony will send minutes to all members within 3 working days of the meeting. 11. Team members notify Tony of changes to minutes within 8 working days, then Tony will post them on the web. 12. Have a 10 minute break half way through. 13. Tony will bring treats (coffee, juice, hot water for tea, and some form of carbs). 14. No side conversations. 15. No Concrete jokes. (Stan Walsh suggests we do not put humorous entries into the meeting minutes) 16. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes 17. Put yourself in the other person's shoes (work to understand each other's perspectives). 18. Have a facilitator to keep the group on track. 19. Share information as it becomes available. 20. Define acronyms. 21. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. 22. Listen to each other. 23. Celebrate diverse opinions. 24. Keep an open mind. 25. Be honest and kind at the same time. 26. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. 27. Have fun.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   28. Don't interrupt each other. 29. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 30. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. PARKING LOT Alteration of Solution Team Mission Statement (once the team is formed) Length of period of relicense (30 years? 50 years?) TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING June 20, 2000 Agenda 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Introductions 3. Review/revise/complete mission statement 4. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 5. Review/amend/add to meeting norms 6. Status report from technical working team? 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4    2000wildlife20000523.pdf en 