BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group September 19, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro Woolley, WA  AGENDA 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action Items 3. Debrief “field trip” 4. Continue fleshing out interests/issues (Ed Schild, Director PSE’s Energy Production and Storage and Joel Molander, Energy Production and Storage’s Asset Manager for Hydro) 5. Discuss expectations for the process 6. Set agenda for October 17 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group September 19, 2000 1:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro-Woolley, WA  MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.”  Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Ardis Bynum (Forest Service), John Boggs and Gail Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Paul Schissler (Town of Concrete), Rick McClure (Mt. Adams Ranger Station), Rob Whitlam, (Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Lloyd Pernela (PSE), Joel Molander (PSE), Ed Schild (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: The next meeting will be at the PSE Mt. Vernon Office on October 17 from 1:00 – 4:00 The meeting started at 1:10 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Review draft of APE (Area of Potential Effects). The APE is the area in which we assess effects to cultural resources listed or eligible to be listed in the NRHP (National Register of Historic Places). Come with questions/suggestions for revision. There are still many questions to be addressed. These include: • Is the transmission line considered to be in the Project area or out? • If it is in, what is the width of the transmission line APE? • Dispersed campsites • Project access roads BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2000 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   • •  Baker Lake Road Jessie: Look at setting up meeting at tribal locations AGENDA September 19 , 2000 (1:00 - 4:00 p.m.) – Forest Service Office in Sedro-Woolley th  1. 2. 3. 4.  Review minutes/agenda Action items Debrief “field trip” Continue fleshing out interests/issues (Ed Schild, Director PSE’s Energy Production and Storage and Joel Molander, Energy Production and Storage’s Asset Manager for Hydro) 5. Discuss expectations for the process 6. Set agenda for October 17 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS Team members introduced themselves to visitors: Ed Schild, Director of Energy Production and Storage; Joel Molander, Asset Manager for Hydro Generation; and Lloyd Pernela, newly hired PSE Manager of Plant Licensing.. PSE PRESENTATION Ed thanked the group for their energy and participation over the last few months. Joel gave an overview of how investor-owned utilities operate. Ed concluded the presentation by discussing the idea of collaboration. He recommended the following article: “Collaborative Processes for Improving Land Stewardship and Sustainability” by Mark Hummel and Bruce Freet in Ecological Stewardship: A Common Reference for Ecosystem Management Volumes I --III. Editors: N.C. Johnson, A.J. Malk, W.T. Sexton, R.C. Szaro. Publisher: Elsevier Science Ltd., Netherlands, 1999. Pending copyright issues, PSE will make copies of the article to distribute at the October meeting. Ed also shared PSE’s interests. He stressed his support of the collaborative process and asked team members to give him a call at any time if they have questions. His direct number is 425-462-3022. The question was raised re: PSE’s plans for potential structural modifications to increase power production at the Baker River Project. The only thing that may be on the horizon is possibly adding another turbine at Lower Baker (The new turbine would likely tap off the existing penstock). Handouts of the presentation were distributed and will be available on the website. ANNOUNCEMENTS The RESOLVE Training addresses issues and interests and decision-making styles within the collaborative process. This training is suggested for all working group members and IS REQUIRED for Solution Team Members. Dates for the training are Friday, October 13th at the U.S. Forest Service Office at Mountlake Terrace and on Saturday, October 21st at Cotton Tree Inn, Mount Vernon, WA. Team leaders will be calling all interested parties and asking them which date works best for them to attend the training. There is a limit of 40 participants in each training. The sessions will run from 9:00 a.m. 4:00 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2000 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   p.m. and lunch will be provided. In the meantime, Jessie distributed a sign-up sheet for those who were ready to sign up. REPORT OF PAST ACTION ITEMS • All members: Reviewed and commented on 7/18/00 draft of Existing Information Analysis (Forest Service document) distributed by Rick McClure at the August 23rd field trip. Rick distributed the next draft of the Existing Information Analysis document for review. As of October 7, Jan Hollenbeck will be taking over this project, so team members should give their feedback to Jan prior to the next meeting at jhollenbeck@fs.fed.us. Of the 5000-acre project area, an estimated 124 acres have been surveyed within the probable APE for the project. HRA is just beginning the design for archeological research. • Jessie coordinated the drafting of a letter to tribes on cultural resources. A letter from Bill Gaines went out to tribes (Upper Skagit, Swinomish, Sauk-Suiattle, Lummi, Nooksack, Nlaka’Pamux, Samish) and Ed Schild made follow-up calls to tribes. He was unable to reach all tribes (had to leave voice mail). PSE will draft a follow-up letter stating where we are in the process and make sure the tribes have been copied on relevant documentation. • Jessie contacted Saul (North Cascade Institute) and invited him to attend. Saul will not be attending working groups (except Recreation). We’ll keep him informed. His interest is Education. • Jessie sent letter of invitation to Skagit County Historical Museum. This seems to be a period of “change-over” for the museum. In the meantime, Jessie will contact them about copying them on distribution of minutes • Jessie invited Rob Whitlam of the State Historic Preservation office to join the team. He joined the meeting by telephone. • Jessie contacted Guy McNally (Skagit County Planning and Permit Center) to see if he wants to participate on this working group/get copied on notes, etc. Guy is interested but too busy to attend. He will be a resource for the group. • Group acknowledged Rick McClure’s contribution during his time with the Working Group. We are sorry to see him go and will miss him. DEBRIEF OF TOUR The team did their Baker River Project tour on August 23, 2000. The tour was quite comprehensive. There was a healthy turnout, with Tribal and State representation. The team leader distributed a sign-up sheet for those who were unable to attend the tour. A make-up tour will be put together to accommodate everyone. ISSUES/INTERESTS Issues 1. Education & interpretation on cultural/historical subjects  • •  Interests Include local history Allowing public access to research findings so public can appreciate the culture/ history of the area  • • •  Possible Solutions Coordinate info. Dispersal (user friendly, standardization, etc.) Determine appropriate means of information dissemination Explore interpretive  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2000 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   • • •  2. Inventory of cultural resources 3. Compliance w/federal cultural resource laws  • • • • • •  • 4. Consultation with tribes 5. Coordination with other Working Groups 6. Determine what effect • Baker River Project has had on cultural/historical resources 7. Managing cultural • resources over the long term (includes mitigation)  Include cultural • landscapes Comply in cost• effective manner Follow Forest Plan direction Meet Forest Service laws and regulations Respect tribal perspectives Include tribal definitions of “cultural resources” (e.g., fish, wildlife, vegetation, Traditional Cultural Properties) See cultural/historical perspectives represented •  options (education/interpretatio n/ outreach) Develop exhibits to show history of the area (past/ present/future Coordinate efforts throughout the region Explore cooperative projects with tribes and interest groups Include cultural landscapes in inventory Consider full range of mitigation measures  Government to government, one-on-one  Concern about erosion and vandalism to cultural sites  •  Stabilize/monitor/recov er sites  Protect, mitigate, and enhance cultural resources  •  Cultural Resource Management Plan  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2000 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Ed and Joel’s presentation • Good progress on tribal contacts and map distribution Opportunities for Improvement: • Get clearer about interests • Tribal representatives would be nice AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING October 17, 2000 (1:00 - 4:00 p.m.) – PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action items…Discussion of APE 3. Continue fleshing out interests/issues 4. Discuss expectations for the process 5. Set agenda for November 21 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting PARKING LOT • Decide how to handle action items (open/closed, etc.) • Show map of general project area, include transmission lines • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Define “cultural resources” in consultation with Tribes and public • Quorum? • Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests • Rotate meeting location to tribal facility? • Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources • Show map of general project area – does it include transmission lines? • Bob Barnes will give a course on Hydrology 101  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/19/2000 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2000cultural20000919.pdf en 