 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group October 17, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. PSE Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action Items…Discussion of APE 3. Continue fleshing out interests/issues 4. Discuss expectations for the process 5. Set agenda for November meeting 6. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group Meeting October 17, 2000 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. PSE Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Paul Schissler (Town of Concrete), Rob Whitlam, by phone, (Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Karen Marshall (Skagit County Historical Museum), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Committee), Shari Brewer (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Jan Hollenbeck (USDA Forest Service) Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 1:20 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. NEW ACTION ITEMS All: Review draft of archeological research design received from Gail prior to next meeting Jessie : Will continue to follow up re: transmission lines. • Was archeological research done at time of putting in the new road? • Are there culturally modified cedar stumps/groves? • Is the road open to the public? • How is maintenance for power lines being performed? • Can one burn under power line? (to re-establish berries) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 1 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Check in with the team leader of Recreation Group re: impacts from dispersed campsites and locations of those sites. • Look at setting up meeting at tribal locations Lyn: Request of Fish & Wildlife Working Groups that they devote time in meetings for presentations by tribes. Larry: Contact Upper Skagit Tribe re: presentation Shari: Coordinate with Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Gail: Distribute draft of archeological research design to team members by November 7 so they can review it prior to next meeting REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECT (APE) This is the area that could contain resources National Register of Historic Places-listed or eligible resources that could be affected by the Baker River Project. This includes resources such as such as archeological sites as well as building and structures. The APE for traditional cultural properties (TCP) is larger than the APE for archeological and historical structures. This is also a fluid boundary that changes over time and is therefore vague. • Transmission line is not in FERC boundary because it is not a primary line to project only. The transmission line follows an existing road. The only new section of road that is related to the transmission line is the northern section near Upper Baker Dam. • Team members feel inclined to include the area under transmission lines in the mitigation plan, perhaps as a secondary APE. • Dispersed campsites are where people choose to camp other than in officially designated campsites. The team would want the APE to include these and other recreational impacts. • The DNR and Crown Pacific have closed some of their roads and sites. This has resulted in an increase in the number of dispersed campsites and the impacts upon those sites. The team is interested in determining which parts of roads (other than County or Forest Service Roads) should be included in the APE. We want to consider not only tribal but also public resources in order to spread the pride of ownership. • Baker Lake Road is owned by the Forest Service and is not considered part of the APE. There was a question raised about the close proximity of the road to the lake at the north east end of the lake. There may also be impacts where the road ends in that area. There has been a lot of expense associated with keeping the road open and in good condition. We will do further research to look at its impacts related to dispersed campsites and other recreational uses. • Mitigation Lands--- Downstream erosion impacts: We will be notified of findings of Fish & Wildlife Working Groups with respect to these issues. We will request that Larry Campbell give a presentation to these working groups on cultural and spiritual significance of fish, elk, etc. A Sauk-Suiattle representative will give a presentation on the cultural significance of mountain goats • We can request a presentation on reservoir level management from PSE and from Army Corps. of Engineers. • Historic Locations within the Town of Concrete BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 2 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • The downtown likely qualifies as a historic district. Is there a tie in with the APE? Does the Town of Concrete want people to stock up on supplies on their way to recreate in APE? We will continue this discussion with John and Gail Boggs. • The dam and powerhouse are definitely in the APE. Potential solutions could include creating educational/historical sites of interest. This would benefit the Town of Concrete economically. • Impact of both lakes to the winter migration routes of elk and mountain goats. We need to see data on this from other Working Groups. • Loss of old growth forests---presence of peeled cedar trees. It is important to remember that past activities affected the APE, • Sockeye fishery and wild blackberries, huckleberries, culturally modified and culturally significant trees, and other traditional cultural properties. We will address the cultural and spiritual significance of salmon. FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS? Future meeting dates: November 21, 2000 1:00-4:00 p.m. Mt. Vernon PSE office December 12,2000 1:00-4:00 p.m. Skagit Tribal Offices? Jessie will check with Scott. Fallback location would be the PSE Office at Mt. Vernon ISSUES/INTERESTS Issues Interests Possible Solutions 1. Education & • Include local history • Coordinate info. interpretation on • Allowing public access Dispersal (user friendly, cultural/historical subjects to research findings so standardization, etc.) public can appreciate • Determine appropriate the culture/ history of means of information the area dissemination • Explore interpretive options (education/interpretation / outreach) • Develop exhibits to show history of the area (past/ present/future • Coordinate efforts throughout the region • Explore cooperative projects with tribes and interest groups 2. Inventory of cultural • Include cultural • Include cultural BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 3 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 resources landscapes landscapes in inventory 3. Compliance w/federal • Comply in cost-effective • Consider full range of cultural resource laws manner mitigation measures • Follow Forest Plan direction • Meet Forest Service laws and regulations • Respect tribal perspectives • Include tribal definitions of “cultural resources” (e.g., fish, wildlife, vegetation, Traditional Cultural Properties) • See cultural/historical perspectives represented 4. Consultation with tribes • Government to government, one-on-one 5. Coordination with other Working Groups 6. Determine what effect • Concern about erosion • Stabilize/monitor/recove Baker River Project has had and vandalism to r sites on cultural/historical cultural sites resources 7. Managing cultural • Protect, mitigate, and • Cultural Resource resources over the long term enhance cultural Management Plan (includes mitigation) resources Email from Rick McClure (fomrer team member from the Forest Service) to Jessie Piper, October 16,2000 re: The October 17, meeting: Jessie: Since Jan Hollenbeck is taking over Forest Service representation on the working group, you can take me off the mailing list. Thanks—it was a great experience to get to learn a bit about another area, and a great bunch of people! I was especially pleased to see involvement from the Boggs’ as representatives of a local heritage group. Of the four FERC relicensing projects I’ve been involved with, this is the only one where I’ve seen that kind of interest from an organization representing local history interests. Your process seems well on track and in step with the sometimes mind-boggling procedures. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 4 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Larry’s presence • Shari’s presence • Karen’s presence • Jan’s presence • Rob’s participation by phone • Detailed notes to cover technical information • Slower pace Opportunities for Improvement: • It might be helpful to have the notetaker more familiar with the group’s technical issues. AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING November 21, 2000 (1:00 - 4:00 p.m.) – PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review minutes/agenda 2. Action items…Wrap up definition of primary (archeological) APE 3. Continue fleshing out interests/issues 4. Set agenda for December 12 meeting 5. Evaluate meeting SUGGESTIONS FOR DECEMBER 12 MEETING: Discussion of expectations Tribal presentations of cultural and spiritual significance of resources PARKING LOT • Decide how to handle action items (open/closed, etc.) • Show map of general project area, include transmission lines • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Define “cultural resources” in consultation with Tribes and public • Quorum? • Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests • Rotate meeting location to tribal facility? • Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations (Rick to share existing information analysis) • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources • Show map of general project area – does it include transmission lines? • Bob Barnes will give a course on Hydrology 101 • Tribe presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/17/2000 MEETING NOTES Page 5 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  