BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Fish & Aquatic Resources Working Group September 14, 2000 1:30 p.m. <ad> 4:30 p.m. Cottontree Inn 2401 Riverside Drive Mount Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items 3. Debrief "field trip" 4. Status report from downstream passage technical working group 5. Presentation by Ed Schild and Joel Molander of Puget Sound Energy 6. Continue defining interest and issues 7. Set agenda for next meeting (October 12, 2000) 8. Evaluate meeting Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group September 14, 2000 1:30 p.m. <ad> 4:30 p.m. Cottontree Inn 2401 Riverside Drive Mount Vernon, WA  MEETING NOTES  Location of the OCTOBER 12 MEETING: It was determined after this meeting and will be at: Skagit Valley Community College, Board Room, CA-118 (Administrative Annex), 2405 E. College Way, Mt. Vernon. Directions will be coming (parking is available in student parking areas only- parking permits are not required for this). The time of that meeting will be 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.  Future Meeting Dates: November 9, December 14, 2000 (1:30 p.m. <ad> 4:30 p.m., locations TBD)  Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund (425) 462-3442, aaspel@puget.com  PRESENT Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife) Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology) Jerry Louthain, Consultant to City of Anacortes, and Skagit PUD (Economic & Engineering Services, Inc.) Carol Bordin (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife) Steve Jennison (WA Dept. of Natural Resources) Fred Seavey (U.S. Fish and Wildlife) Chuck Ebel (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) Nick Verretto (PSE) Joel Molander (PSE) Ed Schild (PSE) NEW ACTION ITEMS:  Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative) Bob Newman (WA Dept. of Ecology) Phil Hilgert (R2 Resource Consultants, Inc.) Dick Raisler, (Fidalgo Flyfishers) Mark Cornwall for Gary Davis (WA Department of Transportation) Brady Green, (U.S. Forest Service) Arnie Aspelund (PSE) Doug Bruland (PSE) Lloyd Pernela (PSE) Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/14/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 B-river_9-14-00_fishWG_notes.doc  Page 1   All: - Review communication protocol, legal & policy review and procedures document drafts on website and provide legal and policy-related feedback to PSE at your earliest convenience. Team leader: -Will give reminder call to persons responsible for action items one week prior to upcoming meeting  OLD ACTION ITEMS:  Gary:  - Get historical harvest numbers  -Bring hard copy of sockeye presentation  Bill R.  - Contact Don Wick of the Economic Development Association of Skagit County and  invite him to attend the Economics/Operations Working Group Meetings  <b7> PSE notified area towns regarding the relicense proceedings and invited them to the working group meetings. <b7> Arnie provided additional copies of the Baker Project License Articles and 1966 mitigation agreement between WDF and Puget. <b7> Arnie distributed copies of the Issues/Interest List. No additional items were added to the list since the last working group meeting.  SEPTEMBER 14, 2000 MEETING AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda and minutes 2. Introduce new members 3. Action Items <b7> Debrief the tour- Do we need another day? <b7> Look at matter of documentation 4. Status report from technical working team <b7> Discuss minutes, scope, and direction 5. Discussion with Ed Schild and Joel Molander (PSE) 6. Interests and Issues <b7> Review list of additional issues/interests that members sent to Arnie since the last meeting 7. Set agenda for next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting  INTRODUCTIONS Team members introduced themselves to visitors: Ed Schild, Director of Energy Production and Storage; Joel Molander, Asset Manager for Hydro Generation; and Lloyd Pernela, newly hired PSE Licensing manager.  ANNOUNCEMENTS The RESOLVE training addresses issues and interests and decision making styles within the collaborative process. This training is suggested for all working group members and IS REQUIRED for Solution Team Members. Dates for the training are Friday, October 13th at the U.S. Forest Service Office at Mountlake Terrace and on Saturday, October 21st at the Cottontree Inn, Mount Vernon, WA. Team leaders will be calling all interested parties and asking them which date works best for them to attend the training. There  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/14/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 B-river_9-14-00_fishWG_notes.doc  Page 2   is a limit of 40 participants for each training. The sessions will run from 9:00 to 4:00 and lunch will be provided. Arnie distributed a meeting date sign-up sheet.  DEBRIEF OF TOUR FOR FISH RESOURCES WORKING GROUP The team conducted their tour August 10, 2000. The tour was quite comprehensive, with all fish-related sites visited. The sun was out, lunch was great, and they saw lots of fish. Arnie has compiled a notebook of digital photos from the Project tour. He distributed a sign-up sheet for those who were unable to attend the tour. Another tour will be organized to accommodate those not able to attend the Aug 10th tour. UPDATE FROM TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP The Technical Working Group met on August 31, 2000. They started the meeting by going around and having each member define their view of what constitutes "successful downstream fish passage." They then categorized the list according to which point in downstream passage each definition related to. They also brainstormed options for solution. A weighting matrix was then developed in a follow-up conference call. That group might have conceptual options that warrant further study for this team to review at the November meeting.  PSE PRESENTATION Ed thanked the group for their energy and participation over the last few months. Joel gave an overview of how investor-owned utilities operate. Ed concluded the presentation by discussing the idea of collaboration. He stressed his support of the collaborative process and asked team members to give him a call at any time if they have questions. His direct number is 425.462-3022. The question was raised re: PSE's plans for potential structural modifications to increase power production at the Baker River Project. The only thing that may be on the horizon is possibly adding another turbine at Lower Baker. Handouts of the presentation were distributed and will be available on the web-site. He recommended the following article: Collaborative Processes for Improving Land Stewardship and I ---III. (1999). Editors : N.C. Johnson, A.J. Malk, W.T. Sexton, R.C. Szaro. Publisher: Elsevier Science Ltd., Netherlands.  Pending copyright issues, PSE will make copies of the article to distribute at the October meeting. Ed also shared PSE's interests.  ISSUES/INTERESTS A listing of interests was begun from the discussion of mission statements and goals. Early on, team members decided to suspend with the exercise of attempting to separate issues from interests and elected to list all brainstorm ideas with the intent of categorizing them later. The following list was developed:  1. Direct/indirect effects on Skagit Wild Scenic River <ad> fish, wildlife, recreation, aesthetics, etc. 2. Improve fish passage downstream, upstream and reservoir at the Project 3. Sustainable levels of anadromous fish stocks to historical levels (to support both fisheries and ecological concerns) 4. Sockeye production potential 5. Improve fish passage and production facilities/operations to meet current/future fish management objectives (also including natural production in all life cycle stages) 6. Quantifying Project impacts related to flow/habitat/fish downstream of Project including Baker River and area of Project influence on Skagit River 7. Quantifying Project impacts to State-owned aquatic land (past/present/future)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/14/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 B-river_9-14-00_fishWG_notes.doc  Page 3   8. Education/Interpretation/Outreach <b7> Educate youth as present and future citizens who value and protect water quality and all species <b7> Have field and stream studies (for students) and historical research with application of academic skills to the process (for educational purposes) <b7> Develop partnerships with PSE and other interested parties in the relicensing process 9. Restoration of resident fish species (native resident) 10. Maintaining and restoring native populations and natural processes 11. Maintain aquatic and terrestrial processes and functions in the watershed 12. To protect, preserve and perpetuate fish and wildlife in their natural habitats 13. Promote ethical sport fishing 14. To manage treaty protected fisheries resources for the 3 tribes along the Skagit Basin. 15. Provide adequate instream flows to protect, preserve and perpetuate fish and wildlife in their natural habitat. 16. All fish, all waters 17. Natural spawning (not hatchery production) 18. Protect against loss of fish habitat (from reservoir) 19. Protection, acquisition (of land), restoration, and enhancement of fish habitat (multiple species) 20. Ramping rates 21. Volitional release- of salmon and trout (resident and other) both upstream and downstream 22. Complete IFIM studies (Instream Flow Incremental Methodology) <ad> include both Baker and Skagit Rivers 23. 401 certification 24. Meet water quality requirements 25. Supplementation programs dealing with brood stocking with only species of origin of that watershed or an adjacent watershed. 26. Recover listed species (endangered) 27. Concern with recreational pressure on sockeye. 28. Review exotic species (e.g., Tiger muskies) and non-native hybrid trout/salmon/plantings in the watershed 29. Coordination of flows in the Skagit River with the Skagit River Project  Parking Lot <b7> Watershed Analysis- presentation by Brady Green at a date to be defined later <b7> We need a strategy to integrate this analysis into the process <b7> Feedback on "Salmon on the Baker River" document <b7> Different perspectives <b7> Post reviews on web? <b7> Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) at a date to be defined later  Meeting Handouts <b7> Copy of PSE presentation on 9/14/00 by Ed Schild and Joel Molander <b7> RESOLVE Training synopsis <b7> Minutes from past Fish working group meetings and technical group meetings <b7> Baker River Project Information Package (CD-ROM ) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/14/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 B-river_9-14-00_fishWG_notes.doc  Page 4   <b7> License Articles and 1966 Mitigation Agreement between WDF and Puget Evaluation of Meeting Well-Dones: Good PSE presentation New people Room with windows Materials provided Refreshments and water Ended on time Opportunities to Improve: Phone technology Missing number of folks (County Park Service, Wildcat Steelhead, Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Talking on the side Started late TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING October 12, 2000 Agenda 9:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. Skagit Valley Community College Board Room, CA-118 (Administration Annex) 2405 E. College Way, Mt. Vernon NOTE: Hydro and Fish Working Group Team Leaders looked for a location to accommodate a combined meeting of both groups. This meeting will be from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. (THIS WILL BE A COMBINED MEETING OF THE HYDRO AND FISH WORKING GROUPS) 1. Review/revise minutes 2. Introductions 3. Action Items Report from Technical Working Group 4. Hydro 101 Presentation (Bob) 5. Presentation on flood control by Corps/County? 6. Continue to work on interests/issues 7. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 9/14/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 B-river_9-14-00_fishWG_notes.doc  Page 5    2000aquatic20000914.pdf en 