BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group October 30, 2000 10:00 a.m. <ad> 1:00 p.m. PSE Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mt. Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review previous meeting notes 3 Review action items 4. Presentation on Forest Service hydro structure (Ardis Bynum) 5. Continue defining issues and interests 6. Set agenda for next meeting (November 27) 7. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group October 30, 2000 10:00 a.m. <ad> 1:00 p.m. PSE Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mt. Vernon, WA  MEETING NOTES  Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement."  Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com  PRESENT  Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Ardis Bynum (US Forest Service), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. of Fish and Wildlife), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  NOTE: Team members will meet at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon for the remaining meetings this year. Those dates are Nov. 27, and Dec. 18. Times will remain 10:00-1:00 p.m.  ACTION ITEMS <b7> Chris: Email draft outline of Bob Barnes' Hydro 101 presentation to all team members and ask Bob to present at December 18 meeting instead of November meeting [or just notify Bob the group elected to defer his presentation to an unspecified future time?] <b7> Ann: Email updated Forest Service list of interests to Chris to add to minutes  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   <b7> All: Review list of organization-specific interests- get feedback from respective organizations <b7> Chris: Contact missing members and encourage their attendance. Let them know about option to participate via conference call.  October 30, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Presentation on Forest Service Hydro Structure (Ardis) 4. Continue defining issues and interests 5. Set agenda for next meeting (November 27 meeting) 6. Evaluate meeting  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Chris reported that Bob Barnes was prepared to give his Hydro 101 presentation to this working group at the November meeting. Anyone interested in providing input to influence the content of the presentation should contact Chris. After consideration of progress to date, the group agreed that the Hydro 101 presentation should be deferred.  DEBRIEF OF RESOLVE TRAINING Well-Dones Good, proactive training. Instructor had good energy Useful techniques for communication within the Working Group- will allow us to really hear each other RESOLVE steps were helpful Strong on styles Showed the value of interest-based negotiations Some of the examples were helpful  Opportunities to Improve Too much for one day Weak on negotiation tools Weak on interests Weak on collaboration process Long on style, lacking in substance Felt like having my horoscope read Too many family-based examples Didn't walk away with specific tools to use.  Suggestions Do a follow-up training 6 months down the line Need to link colors (styles) with appropriate tools.  Question PSE called RESOLVE training mandatory for Solution Team Members. Will this hold true? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   SOLUTION TEAM MEETING DEBRIEF The Solution Team met for the first time on October 25 at the Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace from 9:00 to 3:00. They were missing some key organizations (NMFS, USFWS, Ecology, etc.), but were otherwise well represented. Representatives have been identified from these organizations and full participation is expected at the next meeting, December 13. At the Oct. 25 meeting, members introduced themselves and described their experiences with FERC. They also cited factors contributing to and detracting from success in FERC projects they have been involved with in the past. They drafted a mission statement: By April 30, 2004 develop a settlement agreement and associated documents for relicensing of the Baker River Project that (best) meet the interests of the participants. They will finalize the mission statement and define norms at their next meeting. They will also be putting together a template for working groups to use in submitting options for solution to the Solution Team.  PRESENTATION OF FOREST SERVICE HYDRO INFRASTRUCTURE Ardis described the extent and complexity of the Forest Service Hydro Infrastructure and the decision making process associated with it. If there is a settlement agreement, 4(e) conditions would reflect that agreement. If you have further questions on this topic, please contact Ardis.  ISSUES AND INTERESTS The team defined the following draft interest statements by organization:  Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation: 1. Develop recreation plan consistent with SCORP document. Meet all requirements of laws, policy, and management plan direction (including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act) 2. Meet FERC requirements re: aesthetics and recreation, including need to address potential recreation, not just current recreation 3. Employ a process that produces recreation plan consistent with data gathered under credible studies required of the applicant. 4. Give recreation equal consideration to other resources including fish and wildlife 5. Provide non-motorized trails associated with water. WDFW: 1. Provide recreational opportunities and experiences in balance with resource protection needs and constraints. 2. Understand current and future carrying capacity for recreation use in the Baker River Basin. Forest Service: 1. Scenery and Aesthetics: Maintain or improve scenic and aesthetic quality including sense of place, facilities, and visitor experience Develop and maintain replicable baseline information for scenery and aesthetics including sense of place Develop an adaptive scenery management plan that addresses present and future scenery and aesthetic needs Maintain cultural connectivity with historic and culturally significant sites Improve visual access to scenery 2. Resource Protection  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   Ensure that the project is consistent with all regulations of laws, policy & direction in management plans (include Wild & Scenic Rivers Act) Recreation interests do not prevent the attainment of ecosystem function and habitat connectivity goals 3. Developed Facilities Provide a variety of recreational opportunities and experiences consistent with resource protection needs and constraints Provide well maintained and safe recreation facilities. Develop and maintain replicable baseline information for developed recreation. Support the generation of revenues from recreation use on NFSL which help defray the cost of operations and maintenance of recreation facilities and provide visitor services, where cost effective . Provide accessible facilities where appropriate. Provide recreation facilities and opportunities which are consistent with the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS). 4. Dispersed Recreation Provide sanitary and other resource protection measures to ensure that dispersed recreation use is consistent with FP S&G Provide a variety of dispersed recreation opportunities. Develop and maintain replicable baseline information for dispersed recreation. 5. Trails Provide a variety of trail opportunities. Provide trail links to areas off Forest where appropriate. Provide accessible trails where appropriate. 6. Interpretation and Visitor Information Ensure that visitors are oriented to the area. Ensure that visitors respect natural resources. Provide a gateway to the Baker Lake Basin. 7. Water Based Recreation Ensure that recreational users have visual and physical access to Baker Lake. Provide a variety of water-based recreation opportunities. 8. Winter Recreation Provide a variety of winter recreation opportunities 9. Safety and Communications Provide a safe recreational experience for users Provide access to emergency services 10. FERC Related Develop and adaptive recreation plan that addresses present and future recreation needs 11. Access and Travel Management Provide public access to NFSL The team best-guessed the following in the absence of representatives from these organizations: Town of Concrete: Provide socio-economic support for the Town of Concrete North Cascades Institute: Improved public education, outreach, and interpretation  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   Curt Miller: Develop scenic/aesthetic management objectives and management strategies to meet the objectives (needs clarification) PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals Bounce around with meeting locations Demystify the decision making process of Forest Service [this item can/should now be removed, following Ardis' presentation Oct. 30] List authorities that this team must be aware of Be sure someone from Recreational Resources area sits on the Solution Team. Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole. Get guest speaker from Seattle City Light Offer "Hydro 101" course (lake levels, operations) EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well <b7> Ardis' presentation <b7> POG (fruit juice) <b7> We are communicating well Need for Improvement <b7> Bagels (plain with cream cheese) instead of doughnuts <b7> Ran over (late) <b7> Assignment re: interests was unclear (level of interests) TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING November 27, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Finish defining interests and issues 4. Begin defining studies 5. Set agenda for next meeting (December 18 meeting) <b7> Bob Barnes' Presentation (Hydro 101) <b7> Solution Team Update <b7> Timeline <b7> Continue defining studies 6. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 10/30/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5    2000recreational20001030.pdf en 