 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Economics/Operations Working Group June 7, 2000 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Agenda 1. Welcome & Introductions 2. Set group mission statement in support of Baker Solution Team mission statement: “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost- effective and consistent with public interests.” 3. Set working group social and logistical norms. 4. Identify others who should participate in the group. 5. Set agenda for next meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Economics/Operations Working Group June 7, 2000 10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 MEETING NOTES PRESENT Kevin Brink (PSE) , Gary Sprague (Washington State Fish and Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Coop), Jon Vanderheyden (USDA Forest Service), Tom Spicher (Hydro Consultant), Chris Hansen- Murray (USDA Forest Service), Charles Morton (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) ACTION ITEMS Charles: • Contact Tom Sheahan (Skagit Co. Emergency Services) re: his participation and the participation of Wayne Wagner (Army Corps of Engineers) on the team. • Contact City of Concrete re: sending new planner to meetings. • Explore and publish the best method for team members to call the PSE Mt. Vernon Conference Room in order to participate via conference call. Stan: Contact Steve Fransen (NMFS) re: his participation on this team. Kevin: Contact BPA/Western Energy re: their participation on this team. MEETING AGENDA Welcome Introductions Review Baker Relicense Structure and Baker Solution Team Mission Set team mission statement Who else should be on the team? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 1 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Set social and logistical norms Set agenda for the next meeting Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS After the welcome, members introduced themselves and stated why they were here: Gary: Protecting, preserving, and perpetuating fish and wildlife in their habitats Kevin: PSE engineer to support the relicensing process Stan: Treaty protected fish, wildlife, and cultural resources in Skagit and Baker Basin Tom: Engineer/consultant in Hydro seeing if can add to the process and looking at its effects on smaller projects. Jon: District Ranger at Mt. Baker Ranger District Forest Service- interested in monitoring the process, and managing and maintaining forest lands. Chris: Lead Rep for the US Forest Service, economist, natural resources planner Charles: PSE Manager for operations and maintenance of the Baker River Project BAKER RELICENSE STRUCTURE Kevin Brink reviewed the structure of the Baker Relicense Project. Timeline: By late summer, the Overview Team will ask the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) for permission to use the alternative “collaborative” licensing procedure. Puget Sound Energy (PSE) will submit the license application to FERC on or before April 30, 2004. Structure: The Overview team is made up of those who attend the public meetings on the subject of the Baker Relicense. These members have selected which working groups they are interested in joining. There are 6 working groups representing various topic areas. Each working group may have one or more technical working groups to provide specific technical input to the working teams. All working groups will provide recommendations to the Baker Solution Team, which will be formed in October, 2000. The Baker Solution Team will integrate and balance the recommendations it receives from the working groups in order to formulate a mutually agreed-upon license application to submit to FERC. BAKER SOLUTION TEAM MISSION STATEMENT “To craft a license application for the Baker River Project that is cost-effective and consistent with public interests.” DRAFT MISSION STATEMENT The team came up with a couple of drafts of a mission statement: To provide and/or review economic analysis and evaluation of options to be considered in the relicensing of the Baker River Project. To ensure that alternative project proposals for action for the Baker River Project and its components include: a thorough economic analysis and evaluation of the economic costs and benefits (including non market) and provide for public health and safety BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 2 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 The team will collapse these statements into a single statement at the start of the next meeting. OTHERS WHO SHOUD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP Fred Seavey (USFW), Tom Sheahan (Skagit County Emergency Services), Wayne Wagner, Corps of Engineers re: flood control, Steve Fransen (National Marine Fisheries Service), new planner from City of Concrete, Representative from BPA/Western Energy. This list will be re-evaluated at the next meeting. MEETING NORMS The team came up with this list of logistical and social norms for the team. They will revise this list over time so it suits the needs of the team: Meet the morning of the second Wednesday of the month from 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. (next few meetings are July 12 (at Sedro Woolley Forest Service Office off Hwy. 20), August 9 (there is a conflict with this date, so it will be rescheduled at the next meeting), September 13 (back in Mount Vernon), etc. Meetings will start and end on time. If miss, let team leader know as soon as possible. Make appropriate use of technology to maximize participation by team members in remote locations (conference calling, video conferencing, etc.) No backing up for late comers. No long speeches. Must receive permission from the team if talk is over 3 minutes Begin each meeting with review/amendments of minutes. Do quick evaluation at end of each meeting. No official quorum. Average a 10 minute break half way through. PSE will bring treats (fruit, cookies, bottled water). May need to “park” ideas and move on. Humor is appreciated. Avoid side conversations. Listen to each other. Celebrate diverse opinions. Keep and open mind. Be honest and kind at the same time. Seek first to understand, then to be understood. Have fun. Don’t interrupt each other. Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. Decisions will be made by consensus where possible. Define acronyms before you use them. If can’t make a meeting, notify team leader (Kevin) by email a.s.a.p. Team leader will communicate to the team if there is a change in the meeting agenda, location, etc. due to a sudden change in participants. Minutes will include mission statement, list of attendees, action items, summary of discussions, and the proposed agenda for the next meeting. The minutes will be e-mailed to team members within 5 working days. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 3 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 PSE will e-mail the first round of minutes to team members. Members will e-mail their comments to Kevin within 5 working days of receiving them. Team leader will then post them on the web. PARKING LOT PSE should in the near future provide a Hydro-Economics 101 class for this team. TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 12, 2000 Agenda 1:30 - 4:30 Review/revise agenda Introductions of new members Complete mission statement Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? Review/amend/add to meeting norms Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) Set agenda for next meeting Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 4 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  