BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group September 25, 2000 10:00 a.m. <ad> 1:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro Woolley, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review previous meeting notes 3 Review action items 4. Debrief Tour 5. Presentation by Ed Schild and Joel Molander of Puget Sound Energy 6. Presentation on FERC regulations and context regarding recreation (Chris Lawson) 7. Continue defining issues and interests 8. Set agenda for next meeting (October 30, 2000) 9. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group September 25, 2000 10:00 a.m. <ad> 1:00 p.m. US Forest Service/Park Service Office 2105 Highway 20 Sedro-Woolley, WA  MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement." Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc, Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Ardis Bynum (Forest Service, participated by phone), Ted Smith (WA State Parks), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Joel Molander (PSE), Ed Schild (PSE), Lloyd Pernela (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: Team members will meet at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon for the remaining meetings this year. Those dates are Oct. 30, Nov. 27, and Dec. 18. Times will remain 10:00-1:00 p.m. ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Bring a list of interests for your organization. <b7> ALL: Review matrix arrangement of Issues/Interests/Solutions from Ann <b7> Chris: Check with Bob Barnes' availability to do Hydro 101 presentation in November  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   September 25, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at Forest Service Office in Sedro-Woolley 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Debrief Tour 4. Overview of FERC regulations 5. Ed Schild and Joel Molander (PSE): on Utility Economics and Collaboration 6. Continue defining issues and interests 7. Set agenda for next meeting (Oct. 30) 8. Evaluate meeting  INTRODUCTIONS Team members introduced themselves to visitors: Ed Schild, Director of Energy Production and Storage, Joel Molander, Asset Manager for Hydro Generation, and Lloyd Pernela, newly hired PSE Licensing manager.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Ann brought a copy of the abstract document from the 8th International Symposium on Society and Resource Management, held in Bellingham in June 2000; three copies of the abstracts are present in the Sedro-Woolley office. Team members will review the abstracts at their own discretion.  OVERVIEW OF FERC REGULATIONS FOR RECREATION AND AESTHETICS Chris Lawson gave a presentation on FERC regulations covering three areas of interest 1) General FERC Policy, 2) Licensing procedures; 3) Documentation requirements. This presentation is available on the web site. He also handed out copies of: 1) excerpts from Title 18 of the Code of Federal Regulations (applicable to Federal Agency Regulatory Commission, Department of Energy), specifically Part 4 (Licenses, Permits, Exemptions, and Determination of Project Costs), Subpart F--Application for License for Major Project--Existing Dam, Sections 4.50 Applicability and 4.51 Contents of Application (pages 109-117); and 2) excerpts from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's Hydroelectric Project Relicensing Handbook, dated April 1990, addressing recreation, visual resources and land use and comprehensive plans (pages 89-92).  Ann added that the Forest Service has mandatory conditioning authority under Federal Power Act Section 4 (e) for protection and utilization of National Forest System Lands.  ANNOUNCEMENTS The RESOLVE Training addresses issues and interests and decision-making styles within the collaborative process. This training is suggested for all working group members and IS REQUIRED for Solution Team Members. Dates for the training are Friday, October 13th at the U.S. Forest Service Office at Mountlake Terrace and on Saturday, October 21st at Cottontree Inn, Mount Vernon, WA. Team leaders will be calling all interested parties and asking them which date works best for them to attend the training. There is a limit of 40 participants in each training session. The sessions will run from 9:00 to 4:00 and lunch will be provided. Lyn asked whether a sign-up sheet for those who were ready to sign up should be circulated; Chris indicated that all team members present had already been contacted by phone for  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   registration. DEBRIEF OF TOUR The team did their tour on August 28, 2000. The members seemed satisfied with the tour. They saw no need for a second tour at this time. Team members who missed the tour and would like to go on a "makeup" tour, can contact Tony Fuchs. On the tour, the team didn't visit dispersed recreation sites on the roaded (i.e., west) side of Baker Lake. They also did not get to the Baker River or other major trailheads. There may be a need to explore other recreation sites at a later date as issues arise. Tour summary: The Recreational & Aesthetics Resources Working Group met at PSE Lower Baker Visitor Center at Concrete, WA at 8:00 am. The following was their itinerary: Visit Lower Baker visitor center & fish handling facilities Travel to and visit Lake Shannon boat launch Travel to Upper Baker Development Visit Kulshan Campground, West Pass Dike, Glover Mountain Travel across Upper Dam and visit East Bank trailhead Visit spawning beaches/trout ponds Travel to and visit Horseshoe Cove Campground (USFS) Travel to and visit USFS partially-developed Bayview campground and dispersed campsite adjacent to Bayview entry road Travel to and visit Baker Lake Resort. Lunch provided at the resort. Boat tour of recreation sites on Baker Lake: (starting point at the Baker Lake Resort. The boat tour focused on dispersed campsites, primarily on the east side of Baker Lake. The group visited the walk-in/boat-in Maple Grove Campground, Ermine Creek dispersed site, and the Noisy Creek hikers' camp and adjacent dispersed sites. A short hike was taken up the Noisy Creek Trail about 1/3 mile to visit an exceptionally large Douglas fir tree. PSE PRESENTATION Ed thanked the group for their energy and participation over the last few months. Joel gave an overview of how investor owned utilities operate. Ed concluded the presentation by discussing the idea of collaboration. He recommended the following article: "Collaborative Processes for Improving Land Stewardship and I ---III. Editors : N.C. Johnson, A.J. Malk, W.T. Sexton, R.C. Szaro. Publisher: Elsevier Science Ltd., Netherlands, 1999. Pending copyright issues, PSE will make copies of the article to distribute at the October meeting. Ed also shared PSE's interests. He stressed his support of the collaborative process and asked team members to give him a call at any time if they have questions. His direct number is 425.462-3022. The question was raised re: PSE's plans for potential structural modifications to increase power production at the Baker River Project. The only thing that may be on the horizon is possibly adding another turbine at Lower Baker (The new turbine would likely tap off the existing penstock). Handouts of the presentation were distributed and will be available on the website.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   ISSUES AND INTERESTS The team briefly reviewed the existing list of issues and interests, some of which had been sorted within the context of the table below:  Interests Keep "natural" setting: Use needs to fit the place. What do you want the place to be? Which uses are therefore appropriate?  Issues/Topics Noise from boats, jet-skis, campers Identify impacts of recreation on other resources  Possible Solutions Non-motorized boating options Bicycling as a mode of transportation for moving around the basin  Diminished opportunity to go onto a trail without running into lots of people  Provide recreational opportunities and experiences in balance with resource protection needs and constraints  Protect lakes from water pollution  Look at impacts of dispersed camping in the Baker River Basin (trash & human waste)  Recreation Plan consistent with SCORP document Meet all regulations of laws, policy & direction management plans (include Wild & Scenic Rivers Act)  Noxious weeds Non-motorized trails associated with water  Meet FERC requirements re: aesthetics & recreation (also include Wild and Scenic Rivers Act) Overuse & abuse of  Identify scenic, educational, and aesthetic resources. Identify recreational opportunities at the Baker River Basin Determine current and  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   resources  future carrying capacity for  recreation use in the Baker  River Basin.  Safety, economics,  Conditions of existing  aesthetics, quality of  recreational sites and  experience, user  facilities within the Project  convenience, sustainability. boundary or reasonably  Maintaining "sense of  associated with the Project  place."  Conforming to standards  for new  development/facilities  Meeting FERC requirements to address potential recreation Accommodate public access to sites (project lands and waters)  Lake levels, project impacts, effects on recreation, aesthetics Dispersed recreation (current and potential) Consider access/management of travel routes and facilities  <b7> Project boundaries (?) <b7> Jet skis (mix of uses on water) <b7> Boating access (no long waits and places to park) <b7> Restoration of recreation (established or dispersed) damaged sites <b7> Baker River Resort setting and experience in that setting (long-term clientele) <b7> Winter-related recreational resources <b7> View points, way-finding points, etc. <b7> Provide visitor information services <b7> Our campgrounds are over capacity now and we expect this trend to continue <b7> Trail systems are currently inadequate <b7> Insufficient visitor control (re: proper use of basin) <b7> Safety/health issues of users (adequate law enforcement) <b7> Provide fishing and other access for disabled (disabled persons can't currently enjoy recreational facilities) <b7> What is the visual character of the Basin and how it has changed over time? <b7> What are the stories to be told in the basin (interpretation)? <b7> Improved public education, outreach and interpretation <b7> Improve and create back country trails- system of trails- loop systems <b7> More trails in more developed areas <b7> Use Concrete, WA as a focal point for trail access <b7> Create water trail system  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   <b7> Develop scenic/aesthetic management objectives and management strategies to meet the objectives <b7> Improve identification of all recreational opportunities (basin wide) <b7> Develop education and interpretive plan to include specific resource area information <b7> Develop ways to implement and sustain the plan <b7> Leverage existing resources for education <b7> Develop public communication system <b7> Identification of private lands around reservoir <b7> Provide access to Lake Shannon <b7> Low level hiking opportunities <b7> Improve opportunities for viewing spawning fish <b7> Possible relocation and/or expansion of existing interpretive facilities PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals Bounce around with meeting locations Demystify the decision making process of Forest Service List authorities that this team must be aware of Be sure someone from Recreational Resources area sits on the Solution Team. Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole. Get guest speaker from Seattle City Light Offer "Hydro 101" course (lake levels, operations) EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well <b7> Presentation by Joel and Ed <b7> Ardis' participation <b7> Welcome to Andy Need for Improvement <b7> Phone (need better reception, volume) <b7> We'll miss Chris! TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING October 30, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Presentation on Forest Service Hydro Structure (Ardis) 4. Continue defining issues and interests 5. Set agenda for next meeting (November 27 meeting) 6. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 9/25/00 MEETING NOTES L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6    2000recreational20000925.pdf en 