 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group June 15, 2000 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 College Way, Mount Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review/revise agenda 3. Review action items 4. Review/revise/complete mission statement 5. Who else should be in the team to ensure we accomplish our mission? 6. Review/amend/add to meeting norms • establish regularly scheduled meeting times, dates, locations 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests (generated at April 26 Public Meeting) 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group June 15, 2000 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273 MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy) (425) 462-3552, cdrech@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc, Dan Haas (National Park Service), Lynn Mills (Puget Sound Energy), Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group), Jon Vanderheyden (US Forest Service), Ted Smith (Wash. Parks and Recreation),Lauri Vigue (Wash. Dept. Fish and Wildlife), Ken Wilcox (Osprey Environmental Services, Inc.), Curt Miller (Miller Consulting), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Chris Drechsel (Puget Sound Energy), Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) ACTION ITEMS • Dan: Get Chris the GMP ( Management Plan) for the park • Ann : Bring recreation issues from Baker River Basin Watershed Analysis • Chris: Attempt to categorize interests and issues • Lynn, Chris, Ken: Develop plan for project tour in August • Chris: Send out website link for Eighth International Symposium on Society & Resource Management "Transcending Boundaries: Natural Resource Management from Summit to Sea" The meeting started at 9:00 a.m. and ended at 12:00 p.m. INTRODUCTIONS Each member of the group introduced themselves for the new participants of the group. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 1 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 MEETING AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review Notes 3. Review action items 4. Revisit mission statement 5. Identify who else should be on the team 6. Review/amend/add to meeting norms • establish regularly scheduled meeting times, dates, locations 7. Review/clarify/add to list of issues and interests 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting PREVIOUS MEETING NOTES The team reviewed the notes from the previous meeting. The term “water view” was amended to read “viewshed”. ACTION ITEMS The team reviewed the action items: • Chris listed those he contacted to invite to participate in these meetings. He and Ann will continue to look at whom else to contact. All were invited to make additional suggestions about who should attend • Chris distributed FERC recreation guidelines as well as the FERC document, “Recreation Development at Licensed Hydroelectric Power Projects” • Chris passed out and reviewed FERC’s definition of consensus. The context for this definition was when FERC is considering a utility’s request to use the alternative licensing process. The process working group is working on the communication protocol and will be including a definition of consensus. • The team decided (for the sake of encouraging local participation) to hold its July meeting. at the Forest Service office in Sedro Woolley. The team will try meeting on 4th Monday of each month from 10:00 a.m. - 1:00 p.m. The August Meeting (Aug 28) will possibly be an all-day project tour. DRAFT WORKING GROUP MISSION STATEMENT The team finalized the mission statement to read: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement”.” OTHERS WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE GROUP Chris will continue to work with Ann on identifying additional participants. He will review this list with the team at next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 2 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 MEETING NORMS Norms- #13 will be amended to reflect the definition of consensus provided by the process working group. ISSUES AND INTERESTS The team reviewed the definitions of interests, issues, positions, and solutions. Before listing the interests and issues, a discussion took place about exactly what type of work the group will be conducting. The working group will first conduct the exercise of determining what are all the interests and issues. Then, the group will attempt to prioritize the list and determine what information is already available to address the interest and where additional study is needed. The group will be defining studies that PSE will conduct and help design those studies. Based on the study data, the group will assist in coming up with recommendations that address the interests and issues associated with Baker River Project impacts. It is important that the issues related to recreational impacts of the project get down to the underlying interest. Issues • Identify scenic educational aesthetic resources. • Identify recreational opportunities at the Baker River Basin • Compliance with Wild and Scenic Rivers Act and impact on flow in the areas of fish, wildlife, recreation, and scenic resources. • Determine current and future carrying capacity for recreation use in the Baker River Basin. • To provide a wide range of recreational opportunities and experiences in balance with resource protection needs and constraints. • Look at impacts of dispersed recreation in the Baker River Basin (trash and human waste). • Noxious weeds • Noise from boats, jet skis, campers • Identify impacts of recreation on other resources (fish, etc.) • Condition of facilities (existing) • Lake levels, project impacts, effects on recreation, aesthetics • Access to recreation sites (potential for road closures) • Non-motorized boating options • Jet skis (mix of uses on water) • Boating access (No long waits and place to park) • Bicycling as a transportation mode for moving around the basin (not mountain bikes on trails) • Restoration of recreation (established or dispersed) damaged sites • Baker River Resort setting and experience in that setting (long-term clientele) • Winter-related recreational resources • Keep “natural” setting (use needs to fit the place, what do you want the place to be?, which uses are therefore appropriate) • View points, way-finding points, etc. • Provide visitor information services. Interests • #1(8) is part of the mandate for the North Cascades Institute. • Over time we will have a diminished opportunity to go on a trail w/o running into lots of other people. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 3 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Our campgrounds are over capacity now and we expect this trend to continue. • Trail systems are currently inadequate • Insufficient visitor contact (re: proper use of Basin). • Safety/health of users (inadequate law enforcement.) • Provide fishing and other access for disabled (disabled persons can’t enjoy recreation facilities) • Protect Lake water from pollution- (from motor craft and humans) • What is the visual character of the Basin and how it has changed over time? • What are the stories to be told in the basin (interpretation)? PARKING LOT Visioning exercise Organizational/agency goals July or August tour of Baker Project? Bounce around with meeting locations List authorities that this team must be aware of. Share information from Bellingham Eighth International Symposium on Society & Resource Management "Transcending Boundaries: Natural Resource Management from Summit to Sea" TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 24, 2000 Agenda 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at US Forest Service Office, Sedro Woolley 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review Notes 3. Review action items 4. Review list of other contacts 5. Review (recreation portion only) issues from Baker River Watershed Analysis 6. Continue defining issues and interests 7. Lynn, et. al. will propose tour content for August meeting. 8. Set agenda for next meeting 9. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 4 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  