 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Technical Working Group - Downstream Fish Passage July 26, 2000 9:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. West Coast Sea-Tac Hotel 18220 Pacific Hwy S. Seattle, WA 98188 AGENDA (tentative) 1. Review/revise agenda 2. Review action items 3. Affinitize on data needed 4. Hydroacoustic data 5. Fish species run timing, emergent timing, length-frequency 6. Kevin’s description of model and assumptions: • Variables: market, output, stage-volume relationship, inflow flood control constraints, powerhouse capacity • What trying to do and how? 7. Conceptual study design discussion 8. Strategies for facilities design 9. Other issues 10. Meeting evaluation, set agenda and dates for upcoming meetings BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Technical Working Group - Downstream Fish Passage July 26, 2000 9:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. West Coast Sea-Tac Hotel 18220 Pacific Hwy S. Seattle, WA 98188 MEETNG NOTES Mission Statement: To develop an efficient fish passage design for the Baker River Project. Attendees: Ken Bates (WDFW), Ed Meyer (NMFS), Gary Sprague (WDFW), Fred Seavey (USFWS), Steve Fransen (NMFS), Stan Walsh (SSC), Mort McMillen (Montgomery Watson), Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Kevin Brink (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator) Note: Future meeting dates are: August 31, Sept. 28, October 19, November 16, 2000 from 9:00 to 3:00 at the SeaTac Airport West Coast Hotel. “Old” Action Items: • Gary Sprague will provide a Corps of Engineers contact to PSE to find reservoir productivity models. • Nick Verretto will email team regarding plans to gather temperature data in vertical water column. Stan Walsh will represent agencies in his response to Nick’s email • Nick Verretto to massage temperature data • Nick Verretto to get Upper Baker spill frequency data • Kevin Brink to see how fluctuation limits affect spill (# events, amounts, seasons, duration, flow-days by month). What drawdown range and why? “New” Action Items: • Fred will bring Skagit Chinook length frequency data. • Fred will look at statistical variation from year to year in the gulper mark and recovery data (by September) • Nick will email file on data from gulper pump cycle test to all BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • All members bring interests of your organization • All review the affinitized lists of data to be collected Agenda for July 26, 2000 1. Review Agenda 2. Action Items 3. Affinitize data on data needed 4. Hydro acoustic data - Nick 5. Fish species run timing, emergent timing, length-frequency 6. Kevin's description for model and assumptions, Variables- market, output, stage-volume relationship, inflow flood control constraints, powerhouse capacity What trying to do and how 7. Conceptual study design discussion 8. Strategies for facilities design 9. Other issues? 10. Meeting evaluation set date and agenda for next meeting Meeting Handouts: 1. Upper Baker Discharge, Spill, Pool Elevation – Mean 1989 – 2000 2. Baker Project Fish Traps – Smolt Length – Frequency Data 3. Upper Baker Gulper Pump Test How to tie this Team into Fish & Aquatics Resources Working Group: The team decided to share the meeting minutes from this team as a basis for discussion with the Fish Working Group. The group was encouraged to review a recent article in The Transaction (AFS) regarding fish behavior. Cary will look at putting the article or a summary of the article on PSE’s Website. Gulper Pump Cycle Test: Nick shared data collected. There was discussion regarding how to analyze the data to look for correlation. The issue on how to adjust for run timing has not been addressed. Fred suggested the use of a non-parametric approach (e.g., rank sum). According to him, this would not give quantity, but would give direction. Status of Team: The question was brought up whether the approach used by this team was truly collaborative. The collaborative approach includes looking at all possible options that might meet the interests of all members on the team. This would include looking at everything from the gulper option to various types of screen alternatives and everything in between. As we narrow the list of viable options, study needs will become better defined. Some studies are on a critical path and will be done concurrent with evaluation of options for solutions. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 When this team considers options it will look at a range. What is limited by most economical and by approaching 100% effectiveness. The options will be measured by: Effectiveness Risk Uncertainty Cost The purpose of studies is to reduce uncertainty that appears to be risk at times. Upper Baker Spill Frequency Data: Nick shared data related to the Upper Baker spill frequency. The purpose of these data is to see if it could minimize fluctuation of the reservoir during salmonid out migration. Another purpose is to assess whether a spill would occur during that period if you constrained reservoir operations. He also shared data regarding the length of species at each trap over time. The team decided to collect more sub yearling Chinook data in 2001. Will increased productivity decrease the size of the “design” fish? Possible Options for Solution: (to add to existing list) • Behavioral guidance • Split intake with a deep and a surface opening Parking Lot: • Barrier dam effectiveness -Arnie Aspelund to pass to Fish Working group • Design strategy/process. As relates to costs. • Sediment studies • Separate session for brainstorming options for solution AFFINITY DIAGRAM FOR COLLECTING AND PASSING FISH PEOPLE, POLICY & POLITICS Methodology to trade off risk aversion (Biological uncertainty risk analysis) Effects on other work groups Other Basin Studies (research conducted by others) Agency and PSE Management initiatives/prerogatives Dam removal (NEPA) (fish passage during deconstruction) PHYSICAL SETTING Reservoir level Debris Physical information about dams intake levels, trashracks, (facilities) including operations Reservoir turnover rate Geo-technical studies (landslides, etc.) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 HARDWARE Fish loading, density, hauling, handling protocol Production potential (how to size any facility we build) Relationship to upstream passage facilities Baffle modification FISH LIFE HISTORY & BEHAVIOR Age of migration Depth Flow to migration relationship Size Attraction queues Timing Behavior Information on origin of fish EMIGRATION Harvest of smolts in trout fishery Predation Survival through Lake Shannon and Baker Lake Reservoir level Species Variables that affect fish collection Migration Path (routes through reservoirs) Survival after release (acclimation/release facilities) Delay and attractions Mortality WATER QUALITY/QUANTITY/TEMPERATURE Inflow water temperatures (side flows to Upper Baker, etc.) Inflow/outflow rate Downstream temp effects temp. profiles (lakes) seasonal and at depth temp. differential between areas temp. model temp. effects on operation of facilities (fish /generation) Impacts of water quality on fish AFFINITY DIAGRAM FOR OPERATIONAL NEEDS: BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 O&M Impacts of fish passage on operations How facilities affect project economics Additional O&M cost/constraints (that require training, additional staffing, stock piling...) Downstream impacts on flood control Drawdown flexibility Marketing implications (weekend shutdowns, etc.) NEW CONSTRUCTION Environmental effects associated with construction Additional Powerhouse capacity Minimum Flows- Bypass flow capability Ability to provide minimum flows Construction work windows impacts on operations Meeting Evaluation: What Did We Do Well? Stan’s suggestion we discuss team status Group got to discuss more Intentional digression from the agenda Good candor/meaningful interest-based discussions Working through lunch (having it brought in) What Could We Do Better? We got “foggy” in the afternoon Take more breaks Bring fruit Tentative Agenda for next meeting - Aug 31, 2000 9:00 to 3:00 1. Review Agenda 2. Action Items 3. Brainstorm list of possible options for solution… 4. Other Issues? 5. Meeting evaluation 6. Set agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  