 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group February 12, 2001 1:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Sauk-Suiattle Tribal Community Longhouse 5318 Chief Brown Lane Darrington, WA AGENDA 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Forest Service participation • Research Design • Unanticipated Discovery Plan • APE 4. Sauk-Suiattle Tribal presentation by Lawrence 5. Expectations 6. Set agenda for next meeting 7. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Long House Darrington, WA February 12, 2001 MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Gail Thompson (Historical Research Associates), Lawrence Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Ernie De Coteau (Sauk- Suiattle Indian Tribe), Shari Brewer (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Katherine Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Tribe); John Boggs, Gail Boggs, (Town of Concrete Heritage Museum Association), Alex Maass (Historical Research Associates), Gary Wessen (Wessen & Associates), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribe Council), Scott Schuyler (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Cliff Edwards (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Nancy A. De Coteau (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Triibe), Katie De Coteau (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Dana Graupmann (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Joni V. Soriano (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 1:10 p.m. and ended at 4:00 p.m. FUTURE MEETING DATES/LOCATIONS Future meeting dates are usually on the 2nd Tuesday of each month. We are considering moving our meetings to Mondays due to schedule conflicts of some of the team members, but will stay with Tuesday for now. The next meeting will be on Tuesday, March 13, from 12:00 noon to 4:00 p.m. at the PSE Office in Mt. Vernon. PSE will provide lunch. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 1 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Send Jessie study requests for 2001 field season by March 7th, so she can send them out to team members for review prior to the next meeting. • Jessie: Check on availability of downed cedar. • Connie: Check into debris left in Bear Creek and Thunder Creek areas. • Jessie: Check out transplant availability of young cedar trees and other native plants under the power lines. • Jessie: Check about availability of Jason Schmidt video (December 2000) for interested members. • Jessie: Bring any relevant information from Bear Creek Hydro past archeological work. • HRA: Bring copy of GLO notes that go along with the (enlarged) maps. • Jessie: Status/copies of GIS maps. AGENDA —February 12, 2001 Sauk-Suiattle Longhouse, Darrington 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Forest Service participation • Research Design • Unanticipated Discovery Plan • APE 4. Sauk-Suiattle Tribal presentation by Lawrence Joseph 5. Expectations 6. Set agenda, location for next meeting 7. Evaluate the meeting REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • HRA contacted Leland Stilson, the archeologist at DNR. He gave Gail feedback on both the Study Design and the Unanticipated Discovery Plan. He is planning to participate in these meetings, as his schedule permits. • Connie invited Bob Barnes to give his Hydro 101 presentation at our March 13th meeting. • HRA created larger (more legible) map of p. 80 (Chapter 6) of the Fish History document and distributed copies to team members. • Jessie will keep in touch with Chris Lawson, the team leader of the Recreation Working Group re: dispersed campsites. • Jessie was unable to report on relevant information from the Forest Service’s Watershed Analysis because that document is still in draft form and is being reviewed internally by the Forest Service. It is not clear when the final version of this document will be available. • Jessie reported that Walker & Associates took aerial photos of the Baker Lake area in mid January of this year. She hopes that the GIS maps will be available by the end of February/early March. She will keep us posted. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 2 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Jessie is now able to get timely lake elevation data. She can track it and share it with the team. She is still looking for long term data. She hopes to be able to share this information with the team at the March 13 meeting. • Jessie checked into the possibility of boat trips on Lake Shannon and Lake Baker. Any boat trip is currently unlikely due to low lake levels. FOREST SERVICE PARTICIPATION • Connie said that the Forest Service budget especially for hydro projects has been cut back. They are looking at seeing if it can be increased. Scott Schuyler also contacted the Forest Service regarding increasing their participation in the Baker relicensing process. He suggested that the three tribes send a letter to that effect. • Shari suggested that the three tribes also send a letter to Jan Hollenbeck (Forest Service) to request that she investigate the horse bridge area. RESEARCH DESIGN • HRA updated the Research Design based on the comments they received. Gail distributed a summarized list of all the comments they have received to date. Please let her know and she will send you a copy. • HRA has requested a special use permit from Jan Hollenbeck (of the Forest Service) so they can begin the archeological survey at Baker Lake. Jan said she will run the application by the tribes before issuing the permit. HRA is unable to move forward until the Forest Service issues the permit. All were invited to continue to send comments on the Research Design to HRA. UNANTICIPATED DISCOVERY PLAN HRA is still welcoming input on this plan. The plan will acknowledge the various land owners who are affected. The team will receive an update of the plan at the March meeting. ORAL HISTORY OF TRIBES The tribes will decide how they wish to define their oral history for the relicensing process. Concern was expressed that confidentiality be maintained throughout this process, without another group claiming ownership of tribal knowledge. Archeologists must acknowledge where they get their information. Treaty rights should also be included. The relicensing process is an excellent opportunity to combine tribal knowledge with science. AREA OF POTENTIAL EFFECTS (APE) • The area above the reservoir has not yet been defined in terms of the Area of Potential Effects. An update of the APE will be shared at the March meeting. It is still undetermined whether transmission lines will be included. Special attention needs to be given to any ground-disturbing activities. • Larry would like to see PSE pay for archeological and cultural awareness training for maintenance crews of the right-of-ways. • HRA will present a draft upper limit boundary of the APE for review at the March meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 3 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY AT LAKE SHANNON • Gary described the initial survey trip (5 days at Lake Shannon) with 5 or 6 people (two teams of three each) when the pool was at 380-385 feet. They found many steep slopes above 30 degrees and a lot of sedimentation. They were disappointed that they didn’t see many “old” surfaces. They documented 5 (historic structures) archeological sites dating back to around 1910-20. They didn’t observe any prehistoric material other than two chipped stone projectile points (estimated to be at least 3-4 thousand years old. They did find a lot of historical evidence of logging in the pool. They also encountered large amounts of clay along with evidence of slides and mudflows from volcano/earthquake activity and reservoir fluctuation. No pH levels were tested. • With reservoir levels continuing to drop, there is now an opportunity to go out again to survey some areas that were inaccessible on the last trip. REVIEW OF STUDY REQUEST FORM • Jessie distributed the initial draft of the study request form. This form is the result of a combined effort of PSE and the agencies. The study request form is not the same as an actual study design. It is only the high-level concept of the proposed study. The actual study design would likely be done by a consultant. When citing references attach them if possible. Team leaders will be responsible for coding and tracking studies from their Working Groups. The group reviewed the form. In order to request studies, participants are asked to fill in at least the first two steps of the form. • Participants were asked to submit study requests for the 2001 field season to Jessie by March 7th. This is a suggested date, but not a “drop dead” date, as it is likely that unanticipated needs for studies will arise throughout the process. Jessie will collate all the study requests and send them out for participants to review approximately one week prior to our March meeting. We hope that at that meeting, we can approve studies for the 2001 field season. LAWRENCE’S PRESENTATION ON SAUK-SUIATTLE CULTURE • Lawrence Joseph welcomed us to the Sauk-Suiattle Long House. He began by describing the history and importance of long houses, and tribal way of life. The long houses provided a place for tribal meetings and protected the young ones from the external elements including wolves and grizzly bears. The long house also provided a place for them to hang meat to dry. • The primary source of transportation was the canoe. The tribes traveled around the region, looking for opportunities to barter. They were often looking for more developed tools. • Marriages were arranged, and there was a rule strictly forbidding anyone to marry within four generations of one’s family. • The Mountain Goat has always been important to the tribe spiritually. It also has been a major source of support for the tribe for meat and wool. Its horns were used for tools. Mountain goats live on the highest mountain cliffs. It is disturbing that their current numbers seem to be seriously diminished compared with years past. • Lawrence told of the tribe’s claim to ownership of all natural resources in the area. These resources include salmon. The sockeye was a primary resource, and the Baker River was known as the Sockeye River. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 4 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • According to tribal culture, real wealth is determined, not by money, but by knowledge, for example knowing where the fish spawn and where they migrate, and how the animals live and survive. The wisdom of the land is the tribe’s Tree of Life. Lawrence’s father taught him that whenever a life was taken, one should offer it with thanks to the Creator. The elders must do what they can to preserve the future so the children can walk the land and understand the Wisdom of their fathers. • Lawrence closed his presentation by saying the Tribe must know the way of the Past in order to know the way of the Future. PARKING LOT • Map of general project area, include transmission lines • Upland area--importance of mountain goat • Keys to access Shannon and Baker Lakes and gates up lake • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups • Bob Barnes will give a course on Hydrology 101 (March 13 meeting, from 3:00 to 4:00) • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies • Gail to give a presentation on procedures for inventorying and evaluating cultural resources • Familiarization with policies, directives, regulations, laws and interests • Define all applicable jurisdictions, laws and regulations • Cultural for DNR Land • Cultural aspects of Forest and Fish Agreement • Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? • Have tribal presentations on cultural/spiritual significance of resources MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Lawrence’s informative presentation • Excellent location • Great weather • Smooth flow of meeting • Participation of all three tribes Opportunities for Improvement: • Need to get better community participation AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING— March 12, 2001, from noon to 4:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Review minutes/agenda 3. Action Items • Forest Service participation BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 5 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Research Design • APE • Unanticipated Discovery Plan 4. Review study requests for 2001 5. Bob Barne’s Hydrology Presentation 6. Expectations 7. Set agenda, location for next meeting 8. Evaluate the meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 2/12/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 6 L Wiltse for Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  