 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting May 15, 2001 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 Monte Cristo Conf. Rm. 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda Status report: Action items • Review mission statement • Terrestrial WG Interest List, Solution Team feedback Shari Brewer’s Presentation (9:30) – perspective from Sauk-Suiattle tribe re: terrestrial issues Report from Recreation (Recreation Use Study) Review Study Designs • R-T4, 15, 17 • Status of R-T2, 5, 7, 13 Discuss study requests R-T9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16 Set agenda for next meeting (June 19th, in Lacey, from 8:30am to 2:00pm) Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group May 15, 2001 8:30 am – 2:00 pm US Forest Service Office Mountlake Terrace MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (Phone) 425-462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com ATTENDEES Tony Fuchs (Puget Sound Energy), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Lauri Vigue (WA Dept. of Fish & Wildlife – phone) Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Shari Brewer (Sauk-Suiattle Tribe), Fred Seavey (U.S. Fish & Wildlife - phone), Martin Vaughn (Biota Pacific ), Don Gay(U.S. Forest Service), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Tom Hamer (Hamer Environmental), Jessie Piper (PSE), Kristen Schuldt (PSE), Lloyd Pernela (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) The meeting started at 8:40 a.m. and ended at 2:00 p.m. AGENDA May 15, 2001, 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. (U.S. Forest Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA) Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda 2. Review/revise mission statement and Terrestrial WG Interest List BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 1 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 · Feedback from Solution Team 3. Shari Brewer’s Presentation (perspective from Sauk-Suiattle tribe re: terrestrial issues) 4. Status report: Action items 4. Reports from Recreation (Recreation Use Study) 5. Review Study Designs · R-T2, 4, 15, 17 6. Review Study Requests · R-T12, 11 7. Set next agenda (6/19) in Lacey, WA from 8:30 to 2:00 p.m. 8. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS · ALL: Review Mission Statement. · Fred: Schedule location for June 19 meeting in Lacey. Send directions to Tony to include in minutes. · Lauri: Draft study request for BBS. · Tony: Follow up with Bob re: Park Landbird Inventory Monitoring Data. · Tony: Update contact list and send it to team members (share with cultural/historical Working Group). · Tony: Get statement of qualifications from proposed contractors and send to team members. · Tony and Ann: Draft study request for RT-16. · Tony, Don, Chris Lawson: Continue to discuss recreational study synergies in relation to R-T9 and 10. · Jessie: Get input from Cultural/Historical Working Group re: vegetation mapping. · Don: Send cover types list(s) to Tom and Shari. · Tom: Summarize list(s) of cover types for basin wide mapping and project area mapping for our review. · Tony: Add Shari Brewer to distribution list for this Working Group. REPORT ON PAST ACTION ITEMS · All: Sent Tony a list of documents that consultants can use to expedite their review of species (T-4) · All: Reviewed draft study plans and requests prior to next meeting (see discussion below on reviewing documents). · Tony: Brought those Mint Milanos! (really, the credit goes to Marty!) · Lauri: Checked with Kelly McAllister to see if PSE could use State experts to assist with this study (R-T11) She said that there are no state sponsored surveys going on that would overlap with RT11, and no state biologists available to help in the study. · Lauri: Forwarded information on the tailed frog to Tony, Don, and Bob K. · Tony: Talked to Shari about vegetation types important to the Sauk-Suiattle. She will give a presentation on this topic today at our meeting. It is likely that separate studies will be done to meet tribal interests (by Cultural/Historical Working Group) REPORT FROM RECREATION WORKING GROUP (RECREATION USE STUDY) Tony reported that the Recreation Working Group is doing recreation user surveys. Researchers are conducting recreation interviews at campsites, interviews at checkpoints, and are using drop box surveys. There are specific questions about trails that people are using. Don feels that this methodology is limited because it doesn’t tell us what percentage of high elevation use is related to recreation at the reservoir. In BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 2 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 the absence of this information, Don would like to see us move forward with the mountain goat study. There may be other species (i.e. grizzly bears, wolves, etc.) that we may also want to study. The Recreation Working Group has not yet agreed on a definition of “project-induced recreation”. We need to continue to work with the Recreation Working Group to see that studies are done to meet our interests. SHARI BREWER’S PRESENTATION ON TERRESTRIAL ISSUES FROM SAUK-SUIATTLE PERSPECTIVE Shari (consultant to the Sauk-Suiattle Tribe): Shari reviewed the cultural and spiritual significance of the mountain goat to the Sauk-Suiattle Tribe. She distributed handouts on the importance of mountain goats to the Sauk-Suiattle Tribe and on goat monitoring efforts. Shari also distributed for viewing by the group her copies of information on other terrestrial resources important to the tribe. PSE will scan the presentation handouts and make them available on the web. Highlights of the presentation are as follows: · The native mountain goat’s struggle for survival is symbolic of the Tribe’s own history. · There were as many as 10,000 mountain goats in Washington State in historic times. This number has dwindled to around 100 in the Darrington area and 368 in the Mt. Baker area. · The Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe had a population of 3500 before 1855. By 1920. The number fell to 17. Today the Tribe’s enrollment is 200. · Archeological evidence shows tribal use of the mountain goat dating back thousands of years. · The Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe used the mountain goat in various ways: · The wool was used in making blankets and clothing · The horns and bones were used to form tools and other implements to sustain a tribal livelihood. · It’s pure white fat was used to make a beauty cream. · The meat was eaten fresh or dried to provide one of the food sources during winter months. · The mountain goat spirit was sought in a spiritual quest (like the eagle). The Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe promotes a position to preserve and protect herds of mountain goats in the North Cascades for all time. Shari mentioned culturally significant species, such as: red and yellow cedar, cranberry, cattails, cherry trees, Labrador tea, sundew, bog bean, yellow pad lily, wild crab apple, bear Grass (needs fire), wild strawberry, gooseberry, Oregon grape, and salmon berry. Tom Hamer suggested that we integrate a survey of culturally significant plants into our rare plant survey. Fred suggested that we do what we can to work with the Cultural/Historical Working Group to take into account culturally significant plants, and that the cover type mapping we do should be done on a deeper level into the classification in areas such as bogs in order to identify rare or culturally significant plants. The vegetation studies being proposed in RT2 study are not basin-wide but are limited to the project area. Shari suggested that we translate General Land Office (GLO) notes into a GIS layer to see what’s there. Jessie (Team Leader of the Cultural/Historical Working Group) reported that that Working Group is discussing creating a GIS layer from the GLO notes and integrating that into archeological and traditional cultural studies. She suggested we wait and address this after formal consultation with the Tribes. With input from the Tribes, the Cultural/Historical Working Group could work with this Working Group to develop a study that would address culturally significant plants. Shari suggested we may want to bring in Jan Henderson to help. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 3 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Shari suggests including rock out-crops in our cover-type mapping (looking for berries), also looking for cranberry marshes, cedar trees. Jessie will be the interface between this group and the Cultural/Historical Working Group re: input for basin level mapping. Studies Note: be sure all Study Plans are dated and that they have been reviewed by the author/submitter before being shared with the Working Group members. STATUS OF: R-T2 Vegetation Mapping In Project Area Preliminary Study Plan being prepared by Hamer Environmental, by end of the week. Will meet with authors before sending out for comment. R-T5 Wetland Inventory Study Preliminary Study Plan being prepared by Associated Earth Sciences, by end of the week. Will meet with authors before sending out for comment. R-T7 Historic Vegetation Of The Upper And Lower Baker Projects Not started yet due to lack of field timeline. R-T13: Survey And Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Has been written; Tom’s editing; done in two weeks. RT17 Amphibian Studies In Reservoir Fluctuation Zone Study Design Deferred for discussion at June meeting. DISCUSSION OF STUDY REQUESTS R-T9: Recreation Use Study Put on hold: Don will come up with some conceptual approaches to enhancements to goat population - July timeframe R-T10: Recreational Effects on Mountain Goat Habitat Use Put on hold. R-T11: Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory Preliminary Study Plan being prepared by Hamer Environmental R-T12: Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value Put on hold: refer issue of continuing impacts to Solution Team for resolution and see where Grizzly Bears fall in Species Assessment. R-T14: Sensitive and Survey/Manage Plant Surveys Converted into T-16 with T-3 R-T16: Project Area Rare Plant Survey Tony and Ann Risvold will be working on the study request in the next month. The study doesn’t have to start until after we’ve done cover type mapping. HANDOUTS · Inventory and Monitoring of Wildlife Habitat (U.S. Department of Interior/Bureau of Land Management, September, 1986) · Native Plant List (NE of Penders Canyon T30N, R30E, S1/2 Sec. 11) · Cultural Statement of the Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Related to the Mountain Goat · Sauk-Suiattle Tribe Working to Save Mountain Goats (article by J. Shaw) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 4 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 · GIS Mapping of Vegetation and Forest Seral Stage in the Baker River Watershed Baker River Project Relicensing Study T-15 - April, 2001 (Hamer Environmental) · T4 Preliminary Study Plan – Analysis Species Assessment · T15 Preliminary Study Plan - Basin Vegetation Mapping · T9 Study Request – Recreation Use Study · T12 – Study Request – Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value PARKING LOT · Will PSE compensate key players to attend these meetings? · Length of period of license (30 years? 50 years?) · Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones · Definitions of “project boundary” , “project effects” , “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions · How do we handle “latecomers” to this process? · Culturally significant species · Watershed Analysis · Land Management · Conceptual Mitigation Approach · Consider multiple meeting locations · Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. · Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? MEETING PROCESS REVIEW Well Dones: · Mint Milanos · Participation was good · Good to have Tom here · Shari’s presentation, participation (cross-cultural exchange) · Lauri and Fred on phone · Creation of flip chart list of all study requests and plans · Selecting studies based on meeting interests Need for Improvement: · Don’t send out multiple red-line versions of study plans and requests instead, send out a single version with all comments included · Second draft will include comments without red-lines · Ran out of coffee TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING June 19, 2001, 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. (Lacey, WA) Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. Review notes/agenda 2. Review mission statement BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 5 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 3. Solution Team Report 4 Action Items Recreation Use Study Update Update from Cultural/Historic Working Group 5. Study Designs: Review T2, T4, T5, T11, T13; Finalize T15, T17 6. Review Study Request T16 7. Set agenda, location for July and August meetings (Note: Mountlake Terrace Forest Service Office is not available in July) 8. Evaluate meeting SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE MEETING TOPICS · Process/policy presentation of how to approach impacts due to inundation · WUTC to give “process” presentation BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/15/2001 MEETING NOTES Page 6 of 6 L Wiltse for Terrestrial Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  