BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group February 8, 2001 9:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy's Everett Office CFS Training Room 1122 75th St. S.W., Everett, WA AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items/parking lot 3. Update on Process Document 4. Update on Fish Passage Technical Working Group Meeting of January 30, 2001 5. Skagit Survey Review 6. Review study request submittals 7. Set agenda for next meeting (March 8) 8. Evaluate meeting February 8, 2001 Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Aquatic Resources Working Group February 8, 2001 9:30 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. PSE Office, Everett, WA  MEETING NOTES  Aquatics Working Group Mission: "To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement."  Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com  PRESENT: Karen Kloempken (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelhead Club), Dick Raisler (Fidalgo Flyfishers/WA Council-Federation of Fly Fishers), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Steve Jennison (WA Dept. of Natural Resources), Don Schluter, (Trout Unlimited by phone), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Chuck Ebel (Army Corps of Engineers), Phil Hilgert and Sue Madsen of R2 Resource Consultants, Lyn Wiltse (facilitator - PDSA Consulting)  Agenda Febuary 8, 2001 9:30 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. PSE Office in Everett 1. Review notes/agenda 2. Action Items/Parking Lot 3. Skagit River Reconnaissance Level Survey Presentation (R2 Resource Consultants) 4. Update on Process Document 5. Update on Fish Passage Technical Working Group Meeting of Jan.30, 2001 6. Hydrologic Review Presentation (R2 Resource Consultants) 7. Review study request submittals 8. Set agenda for next meeting (March 8)  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: B-river_2-08-01_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  1 of 5   9. Evaluate meeting  FUTURE DATES The team decided to continue to meet at the PSE Office in Everett on the second Thursday of each month, from 9:30 to 2:30 for 2001: Mar. 8, Apr. 12, May 10, June 14, July 12, Aug. 9, Sept., 13, Oct 11, etc.  NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Get study requests for 2001 field season to Arnie by February 18th. <b7> Arnie: Send hard copy of map lists of gage sites and today's handouts of the Fish Passage Technical Working Group to Don Schluter. <b7> Karen: Have Gary email spread-sheet to Don Schluter.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS  <b7> Nick and Arnie developed an index/bibliography of existing studies. Arnie distributed a handout of the initial draft of the Baker Project Alphabetical Reference List. We will continue to add to this list as we go. <b7> Nick: Checked with Bob Barnes re: What % does the Baker make up of Skagit River flow (regulated/unregulated/over all seasons). This information will be covered by the R2 Presentation on the Skagit River Reconnaissance Level Survey conducted in May of 2000. <b7> Arnie emailed study requests to all team members by February 2nd.  OLDER ACTION ITEMS Gary: Bring hard copies of sockeye presentation  SKAGIT RIVER RECONNAISSANCE LEVEL SURVEY PRESENTATION Sue Madsen and Phil Hilgert of R2 Resource Consultants walked through a Power point presentation of the objectives, scope, and results of their field reconnaissance. During a planned Project shut down in May 2000, staff from PSE and R2 Resource Consultants conducted a three -day survey of Skagit River habitat features. Sue Madsen and Phil Hilgert of R2 presented the results of the reconnaissance level surveys describing the distribution and frequency of side channels, gravel bars, depressions and large woody debris. A copy of the presentation will be available on Puget's Baker River relicensing website. They also distributed hard copies of the presentation. Doug distributed copies of proposed Gage Site Locations for the Skagit River.  UPDATE ON PROCESS DOCUMENT Arnie distributed copies of the latest draft of the Process Document for the relicensing of the Baker River Project. The group didn't spend any time on it because it is still very much a draft and won't even be reviewed by the Solution Team until March or possible April.  FISH PASSAGE TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP UPDATE The Fish Passage Technical Working Group met on January 30, 2001. They are currently focusing on downstream fish passage (migration, attraction, collection and transport). They are  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: B-river_2-08-01_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  2 of 5   reviewing some conceptual design concepts. They feel like they don't have enough information yet to make a recommendation to go ahead with a design. They are initiating studies to provide answers so they can make recommendations to this group.  LOWER BAKER MAINTENANCE With current basin flow levels at less than half what they normally are, it is possible that the Baker Project operations will run out of water by the first week in March. The agencies decided that the best use of that water is to keep water levels in the Skagit River at 7600cfs (for fish) as long as possible and hope for rain. PSE will take the maintenance outage at Baker River beginning in April (or sooner if it runs out of water) and lasting 16 weeks. The goal is to refill Lower Baker in time to reach spill crest height in time for the summer sockeye returns, June 25th.  HYDROLOGIC REVIEW PRESENTATION (R2 Resource Consultants) Sue and Phil walked the team through the hydrologic review they conducted. They also distributed hard copies of the presentation. Sue Madsen of R2 Resource Consultants presented an evaluation of the timing, magnitude, frequency and duration of down ramp events at Puget Sound Energy's Baker River Project. The effect of Baker River Project, Skagit River Project and tributary inflow (e.g., Sauk River) on mainstream Skagit River stage fluctuations was examined using the 1996-1999 record of 15 minute stage intervals at six USGS gages.  STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS The team reviewed the three new study requests that were distributed since our meeting last month. All team members were asked to submit study proposals to Arnie as soon as possible for the 2001 field season.  Chuck reviewed the Upper Baker River Delta request that he submitted and the Corps is funding. He did a bull trout spawning habitat assessment at 700 feet. He will do the same at 708 and at 720. He may use a combination of old fashioned observation and aerial photos. There may be an opportunity for him to do a sockeye assessment at the same time. The study results are needed by USFW by August, 2001. Phil suggested Chuck look at (1) slope of the delta; (2) extend the survey to complete range of reservoir fluctuations; (3) available habitat at different pool levels 707, 708-720 (incremental approach); (4) effect of reservoir levels on habitat conditions?; (5) evaluate enhancement opportunities. Chuck will get together with PSE and others to determine how the scope of this study can be expanded to fulfill other data needs of the group.  The group then reviewed the "Nutrient Addition to Baker and Shannon Lakes and Tributaries" submitted by the Wildcat Steelhead Club. Bill suggested we study the current levels of nutrients in the tributaries as well as the lakes to see if they are sufficient for optimal productivity. PSE said they are already facilitating nutrient supplementation with carcasses in the streams.  Rod walked the group through the Department of Ecology's proposed study: "Mainstem Skagit River Habitat Assessments and Flow/Habitat Relationships". He said some of the concerns in this study were covered by R2's presentation.  STUDY REQUEST TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP:  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: B-river_2-08-01_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  3 of 5   Stan, Nick, Arnie, Karen, Bill, Chuck, Rod, and Cary volunteered to form a technical working group to review study requests and make recommendations on which ones should be done in the 2001 field season. They will also be looking for opportunities to combine studies and or throw out studies in cases where they purport to collect data that are already available. They will be getting together on February 22 in one of the conference rooms at the PSE Office in Everett, starting at 9:00 a.m. to sift through all 2001 field season study requests and make recommendations to this group.  LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS  <b7> Survey Request: Native Char Potential Spawning Habitat Assessment on the Baker River Delta (Corps of Engineers) <b7> Survey Request: Nutrient Addition to Baker and Shannon Lakes and Tributaries (Wildcat Steelhead) <b7> Survey Request: Mainstem Skagit River Habitat Assessment and Flow/Habitat Relationships (State Dept. of Ecology) <b7> Upper Baker Baffle Modification for Flow Test (May, 2000) <b7> Modified Intake Baffle Screen; Option 1--Floating curtain Minimum Operating Reservoir Level Plan and Section (Figures 1 through 6) <b7> Scientific report, "Ecological Connectivity in Alluvial River Ecosystems and Its Disruption By Flow Regulation" (taken from Regulated Rivers Research Management, Vol.11, 105-119 (1995) <b7> Proposed Gage Site Locations for Skagit River <b7> R2 Presentation materials: Reconnaissance-Level Investigation of Habitat Features in the Lower Skagit River, Washington <b7> R2 Presentation materials: Investigation of Hydropower Operations in the Lower Baker and Skagit Rivers, Washington, 1996-1998  PARKING LOT <b7> Watershed Analysis- presentation by Brady Green at a later date We need a strategy to integrate this analysis into the process <b7> Feedback on "Salmon on the Baker River" document Different perspectives Discuss posting reviews on web <b7> Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) at a date to be defined later <b7> State agency presentation re: mandates: FS, Parks, Ecology, Fish and Wildlife, DNR, DOT, NMFS, USFWS  EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones <b7> R2 presentations <b7> Better coffee <b7> Great food  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: B-river_2-08-01_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  4 of 5   <b7> We start at 9:30 and end at 2:30 Opportunities to Improve <b7> Make sure Don gets all materials ahead of time <b7> Not moving as fast as we'd like to <b7> Impact of limited Forest Service participation <b7> Concern re: last minute study requests <b7> We start at 9:30 and end at 2:30 Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting March 8, 2001 9:30 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. PSE Office in Everett 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review Action Items and Parking Lot 3. Discussion of article: Ecological Connectivity in Alluvial River Ecosystems 4. Study Request Submittals for 2001 5. Report form Study Request Technical Working Group 6. Set agenda for next meeting (April 12) 7. Evaluate meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: B-river_2-08-01_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  5 of 5    2001aquatic20010208.pdf en 