 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group April 23, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Update on Visitor Survey study plan 4. Review study plans for study requests R12, R14 and R9 5. Set agenda, location for May 21 meeting and June and July meetings 6. Evaluate meeting 7. 8. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group April 23, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy (U.S Forest Service), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: Technical Working Group will meet/conference call May 1, 2001 at 10:00 a.m. Chris will send out all necessary materials ahead of time. NOTE: The next meeting date is 5/21 (to avoid Memorial Day), 9:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. The location of the next several meetings will be at the Forest Service Building in Mountlake Terrace, WA (6/25, 7/23, 8/27) NEW ACTION ITEMS • Chris: Invite Roger DeSpain of Whatcom County • Get contact for Skagit Co. to attend these meetings • Chris: Talk to Ken Wilcox re: his participation on this team • Andy: Shared facilities operational inspections, matrix with Ann & Chris. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 4/23/01 MEETING NOTES Page 1 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Chris: Draft language to publicize visitor surveys in the next week or so and get feedback from Ann. Give final version to Andy who will have signs created and posted. • Chris: Develop a long and short form for survey questions. • Tony: Send Don mountain goat Study Request Form to team members • Chris: Send out revised survey form for all to review prior to May 1, 10:00 conference call. • Chris: Send out draft study plans for R-9 and R-14 REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • We discussed the lack of broad participation on the team. The next public meeting (June/July) may stir more interest. • Tony had Joetta (R-2) give Chris the map on dispersed recreation done by the Forest Service. Ann feels that this mapping will be an adequate starting point. • Jim pointed Chris to a couple pieces of information related to boat ramp conditions (as input to the developed facility inventory). • Jim provided PSE with statewide recreation data to be used in SCORP. This information should be ready this summer (not time critical). Chris distributed hard copies of what he got from Jim. • Chris reviewed County traffic counts. The sample period was pretty skimpy. The Forest Service has more comprehensive data that may be more helpful. April 23, 2001 Agenda 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. at USFS office, in Mountlake Terrace, WA NOTE: NEW EXTENDED HOURS. BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Update on Visitor Survey 4. Review Study Plans for R12, R14, R9 5. Set agenda, location May 21 (Mountlake Terrace), June and July 6. Evaluate meeting R13: Recreation Visitor Survey Chris sent out a revised plan last week to team members. This version updates and replaces the March 21 draft that was circulated previously and discussed at our March 26 work group meeting. The current version incorporates changes made in response to review comments; discussion from an April 6 conference call among Ann, Jim, Tony and Chris; and observations of actual field conditions during an April 12-13 site visit. He walked the group through the survey, highlighting the changes. The observation forms and survey forms are still rough. Chris distributed hard copies of these forms - one for water and one for land-based observations. We decided that the most feasible locations for intercept survey work were the old Koma Kulshan Guard Station and Road 1106 at the PSE restroom facility (on separate dates). We will be moving locations as deemed necessary. We will need to publicize the fact that we will be doing visitor surveys this summer so folks will be BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 4/23/01 MEETING NOTES Page 2 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 more likely to participate. The Forest Service will help get the word out as to what we’re doing and how it will benefit visitors. They will inform visitors at the front desk, bulletin boards and also on the Forest Service website. Section 44 – Drop Box Surveys: We are considering a long form and a short form (a subset of the long form). Chris will put together drafts for a Technical Team to review prior to our next meeting. Section 5.2 – Sampling Stratification (temporal and geographic) is new. We will double our intensity of sampling during the summer season (compared to the first draft). We will do a random selection of weekdays and weekend days for sampling. We will also vary the starting points and times of the circuits. Early morning hours will be confined to boat ramps and water. We would stop by 8:00 p.m. each day. We will be covering five geographic strata. The survey crew will visit developed campsites and make contact/answer questions/remind visitors to fill out the surveys (distributed by hosts). Section 5.3 – Sampling Effort Allocation This section was slightly revised. The split between Baker and Lake Shannon was originally proposed at 75/25, respectively. We will now allocate 70% of our time at Baker and 30% at Shannon. We’ll get a bigger return for the effort at Baker. We will likely have to adjust the schedule over time. “Drive-bys” will be treated as a separate stratum. The sampling period will be .5 day. The sampling frequency will be: Off-Peak: 6 weekend Peak: 6 weekend 6 weekday samples 6 weekday (3 in spring and 3 in fall) Chris will diminish slightly the survey work at Shannon boat ramps and land sites in order to accommodate these numbers: Off-Peak: 11 weekend Peak: 13 weekend 9 weekday 9 weekday Section 5.4 – Winter Sampling Coverage It isn’t cost effective to have a crew collect information in winter. Tony can gather data while doing his winter eagle survey. Andy can also help. Some Forest Service folks can also help fill out observation forms during this period. Chris modified the observation forms (now called “Developed & Dispersed Sites) by changing the activities in accordance with input he got during the conference call. These will be filled out for each area. We added a space for day of the week and a column for notes. We also decided to add an observation form, accompanied by a map for dispersed campsites. This would capture occupancy/campsite by date. Chris will develop a long form and a short form (subset of the long form) for a technical Working Group to review next week. STUDY PLANS R1 & R6 = R12: Developed and Dispersed Site Inventory The group feels fairly comfortable with the site inventory. Parameters have been established. We need to be very clear about operational definitions so we get consistent and reliable data. We decided that we also want to count sites that are below full pool. The group agreed to proceed. Chris will send out a new version of the site BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 4/23/01 MEETING NOTES Page 3 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 inventory form for the group to review. How do we define unique identifiers for dispersed sites? R7 +R8 = R14: Secondary Data Collection Deferred for discussion at our May 21 meeting. R9: Electronic Monitoring Chris will talk to Whatcom County to get a permit. Ann will help with defining locations. PARKING LOT - Visioning exercise - Organizational/agency goals - Bounce around with meeting locations - Operationally define “vicinity”, “watershed”, “project induced”, “dispersed”, or “displaced” - List authorities that this team must be aware of - Be sure someone from Recreational Resources area sits on the Solution Team. - Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole. - Look into getting guest speaker from Seattle City Light - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) - Land Management - Get a National Park Service rep - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Need good maps of the project area -Consult with Jim Johnston (with WDFW) -Trail head surveys(?) EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Ann • Mint Milanos • Members’ attention to detail • Humor • Bismarks Need for Improvement • Participation from others • Need to fish more and cut less bait TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR APRIL MEETING May 21, 2001 Agenda 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. at USFS office, in Mountlake Terrace, WA NOTE: NEW EXTENDED HOURS. BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 4/23/01 MEETING NOTES Page 4 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 2. Review Action Items 3. Study Plans – R-9; R-14 4. Look at preliminary data from site inventory 5. Look at preliminary data from other surveys 6. Set agenda, location June 25 (Mountlake Terrace), July and August 7. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FOR 4/23/01 MEETING NOTES Page 5 L Wiltse for Recreation Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  