BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group May 10, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Conference Room A (425-775-9702) 21905 64th Avenue West, Mountlake Terrace, WA  AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items/parking lot 3. Continue review of study plans and requests 4. Set agenda for next meeting (June 14) 5. Evaluate meeting May 10, 2001  Driving Directions to US Forest Service Office: 1) Driving North from Seattle (or South from Everett) on I-5, take the 220th St. SW exit (exit 179). 2) Turn west (right if from southbound I-5, left if from northbound I-5) onto 220th St. SW. 3) Drive west about a block and turn right onto 64th Ave W. 4) The office building is about ¼ block down the street on the right side of the road.  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Aquatic Resources Working Group May 10, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA  MEETING NOTES Aquatics Working Group Mission: “To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement.”  Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT: Karen Kloempken (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Dick Raisler (WA Council-Federation of Fly Fishers/Fidalgo Fly Fishers), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Brady Green (U.S. Forest Service), Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Kristin Schuldt (PSE), Sue Madsen and Phil Hilgert (R2 Resource Consultants), Bob Wright (WA Dept. of Ecology), Chuck Ebel (U.S. Corp of Engineers), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited by phone), Carl Corey (U.S. Forest Se), Fred Seavey (U.S.Fish & Wildlilfe), Gary Sprague WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator - PDSA Consulting) Agenda May 10, 2001 9:00 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA Bring Lunch 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Action Items Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  1 of 6   3. Study Request Submittals/Study Plan Development 4. USFS Presentation on NW Forest Plan and Aquatic Conservation Strategy 5. Study Request Submittals/Study Plan Development Update on PSE reservoir operations model. 6. Parking Lot 7. Set agenda for next meeting, June 14 – Room 1b & 1c at Department of Ecology in Bellevue, WA 8. Evaluate meeting FUTURE DATES AND LOCATIONS The team will continue to meet on the second Thursday of each month, from 9:00 to 2:30: June 14, July 12, Aug. 9, Sept. 13, Oct. 11, etc. NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Provide comments on A1, B, C and A-2 by June 14. • Chuck: Notified team members when delta field survey is to take place. • Nick: Get update on aerial photos/surface model. • Rod: Meet with PSE to come up with spill protocol. • Phil: Distribute copies of Study Plan for A1, B, and C by June 7th for all to review. • Arnie: Re-send the most current version of A-2 for review. • Brady: Invite Jim Chu to do presentation on Wild & Scenic River at July meeting. • Fred: Talk with Terrestrial Group re: wetlands that are hydrologically but not directly connected to the river. • R-2: Complete Task 1 of R-A01.A by June 30. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Provided feedback to Arnie on R-A01.A, B and R-A02 by May 2. • Arn: Gave Orrell’s contact information to Sue. • Arnie: Emailed copies of R-A01.A, B and R-A02 to team members ASA • Rod: Reserved Dept. of Ecology Office in Bellevue for June meeting. • Gary: Distributed hard copies of his May, 2000 sockeye presentation. INTRODUCTIONS The team welcomed Kristen Schuldt, PSE’s new FERC Licensing Information Coordinator to the group and Carl Corey, Wildlife/Terrestrial Specialist from the U.S. Forest Service. Carl will give a presentation on the NW Forest Plan and Aquatic Conservation Strategy. GROUT SPILL UPDATE Bob reported that he was on vacation during a media report that questioned the timeliness of the reporting of the spill. It was unfortunate that Ecology Public Information officer was not aware of how Bob had worked with PSE re: the spill. Rod distributed a handout on protocol for emergency spill response in Washington State with spills of oil and hazardous materials. Ecology needs to be contacted immediately. They have a 24hr./7 day phone contact number. When in doubt, Ecology should be Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  2 of 6   called so they can advise appropriate action. It is also good to provide Ecology with advance warning when possible. Bob acknowledged that it is difficult to determine how much of a substance would constitute a spill. It makes good sense and is good Public Relations to report any spill. If a spill might affect the Skagit River, the Forest Service would also appreciate a call. Washington Department of Fish & Wildlife works with Ecology to manage spills.  OUTAGE UPDATE PSE’s Lower Baker generator should be back on line by mid-June. They have been spilling 2,0003,000 cfs at Lower Baker for the past couple of weeks. They ramp down at night and resume spilling during the day. The turbidity is gradually beginning to subside. NORTHWEST FOREST PLAN AND HYDROPOWER LICENSING NFP 101 Carl Corey gave a very informative presentation on the NW Forest Plan as it relates to relicensing the Baker River Project Relicensing Process. His presentation is available on the Website. STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS/STUDY PLAN DEVELOPMENT Study # Title A01.A Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys  A01.B Reservoir Tributary Biological Surveys  Notes/Next Steps Sue has been working with a variety of sources to gather information and is also conducting a literature review. Still on track to complete this by June 30th. At this point they are planning to survey up 1 kilometer of each tributary. There is a question about how far to survey the main stem of the Baker (A-18). We will expand 1A to include A-18. We will continue with Phase1 and then make a decision, re: the level of survey/study methods required for data gathering that meets everyone’s interests. We will make this decision at our June meeting. Defer to June meeting (Phil)  A01.C Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys  Defer to June meeting (Phil)  A02  Finalize comments at June meeting  A03  LB River Habitat Mapping Reservoir Fish Population Characteristics  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  Defer to June meeting. Will be bringing in a graduate student to do this. 3 of 6   A04  LB/Skagit River Flow, Gaging  A09  Skagit River Flow and Habitat Assessment (HIGH PRIORITY)  Approximately six weeks of readings have been gathered. They will continue until the fall.  Proceeding with Study Plan. Met with Paul Uncapher, formerly with Forest Service to discuss this plan. Upon reviewing the tables, he suggested the issues be stated as hypothesis to be tested. Phil will do this. Phil proposed we separate out the channel and geomorphic piece as a separate study item - A24: Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis. This will make these studies easier for outsiders to find. Paul also suggested that either this group or the Terrestrial Group study areas inside the flood plain (wetlands that are hydrologically connected to the river.) A05 Water Quality Sampling Keep separate from A13. A06 UB Passage Design Baffle Modification Work is progressing. Starting the installation next A08 UB Passage System Evaluation week. Report in June. A07 Lower Baker Forebay Bathymetric Survey Pending – proceeding by June 1st. A10 Baker River Delta Habitat AssessmentProceeding …awaiting next level of survey Char conditions. A11 Nutrient Addition Parking Lot- not for 2001. A12 Instream Flows for Biodiversity Split between A21 and A09. A13 Water Quality Assessment Keep separate from A05. A14 Reservoir Shoreline Erosion Not for 2001-Needs further development. A15 UB Delta Scour Proceed to Study Plan. Consider control added to study design. A16 Lower Baker Delta/Channelization Pending – Not for 2001. A17 Tributaries Surveys Upstream of Barriers Coordinate methodology with A01. A18 Baker River Survey Upstream of 1 km. Coordinate methodology with A01. A19 Review Limnological Information Pending. A20 Large Woody Debris Management Pending. A21 Skagit Wild & Scenic River Values Pulled out from A12 – Pending. A22 Baker Lake Trout Impacts Evaluation Probably defer to 2002 – Discuss at next Meeting. A23 Baker River Wild & Scenic River Values Pending/Also recreation issue. A24 Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis  Study Plan under development.  LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS: • FOCUS – Emergency Spill Response in Washington State (WA Department of Ecology) Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  4 of 6   • • •  BAKER RIVER SOCKEYE – June 2000 presentation by Gary Sprague (WDFW) to the Baker Aquatic Working Group NW Forest Plan powerpoint presentation (U.S. Forest Service) 4/24/00 Memo – Non-Federal Hydropower Projects and the Northwest Forest Plan  ADDITIONAL ISSUES Water Quality/Quantity during planned maintenance outages Water Quality/Quantity during unplanned outages PARKING LOT • Watershed Analysis presentation by Brady Green (Aquatic findings- share in June or July?) We need a strategy to integrate this analysis into the process • Feedback on “Salmon on the Baker River” document Different perspectives Discuss posting reviews on web • Chinook Working Group- Skagit River Chinook Recovery Plan • Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) in fall? • Presentation on ESA (direct relationship to 4(d) • State agency presentations re: mandates EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones • Carl’s presentation • Reminder of interests • Got closure on disagreement • Food! • Good facilitation • Baker River Sockeye presentation handout • Forest Service hosting Opportunities to Improve • Ran over • Lack of follow-through on some study plan developments • Think about rooms with windows that open • Reminder of interests Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting June 14, 2001 9:00 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. Room 1b & 1c, Department of Ecology in Bellevue, WA Bring Lunch 1. Review agenda and minutes Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  5 of 6   2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.  Review Action Items Continue review of Study Plans and Requests Update on Fish Life History & Habitat Intersections Brady’s presentation on Watershed Analysis Update on PSE Operations model Parking Lot Set agenda for July 12 (location TBD) Evaluate meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 5.10.01_fishwg_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  6 of 6    2001aquatic20010510.pdf en 