BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group June 14, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. WA Department of Ecology Room 1B/1C th 3190 160 Ave. SE, Bellevue, WA  AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items 3. Continue review of study plans and requests 4. Update on Fish Life History & Habitat Intersections 5. Presentation on USFS Watershed Analysis 6. Update on PSE operations model 7. Parking lot 8. Set agenda for next meeting (July 12) 9. Evaluate meeting June 14, 2001  Driving Directions to Dept. of Ecology Office: 1) Eastbound on I-90 from I-5 or I-405: Take exit 11A, Keep left, drive past the 150th Ave. SE exit and take the 156th Ave. SE exit. Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   2) Cross over the freeway and move one lane to the left to avoid the ‘exit only’ lane. 3) At the first light, turn right onto Eastgate Way. Follow Eastgate to 160th Ave. SE (3rd light) and turn left. 4) Once on 160th Ave. SE, turn into the third driveway on the right. Beige two story building. Parking in front of the building or one block on the opposite side of 160th Ave. SE.  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Aquatic Resources Working Group June 14, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. Dept of Ecology 3190 160th Ave. SE Bellevue, WA  MEETING NOTES Aquatics Working Group Mission: “To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement.”  Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT: Karen Kloempken (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Rod Sakrison (WA Dept. of Ecology), Bob Wright (WA Dept. of Ecology), Brady Green (U.S. Forest Service), Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Doug Bruland (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Sue Madsen and Phil Hilgert (R2 Resource Consultants), Chuck Ebel (U.S. Army Corp of Engineers), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited, by phone), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Bob Barnes (PSE), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Dick Raisler (Fidalgo Fly Fishers,WA Council-Federation Fly Fishers), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator - PDSA Consulting) AGENDA June 14, 2001 9:00 a.m.–2:30 p.m. Room 1b & 1c, Department of Ecology in Bellevue, WA Bring lunch 1. 2. 3. 4.  Review Agenda and Minutes Action Items Study Request Submittals/Study Plan Development – 1A, 1B, 10, 1C Brady’s presentation on Watershed Analysis  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  1 of 6   5. 6. 7. 8. 9.  Study Request and Plans - A2-24 Update on PSE Operations Model Parking lot Set agenda for July 12 meeting Evaluate meeting  FUTURE DATES AND LOCATIONS The team will continue to meet on the second Thursday of each month, from 9:00 to 2:30: July 12, Aug. 9, Sept. 13, Oct. 11, etc. INTRODUCTIONS: We welcomed Tony Fuchs, PSE Team Leader for Terrestrial Working Group and PSE representative on the Recreation Working Group. NEW ACTION ITEMS ! Arnie: By 6/15 send out email reminder to team members re: all study-related action items and their due dates. ! ALL: Send study-related comments directly to Sue (R-2) and copy Phil, Arnie, and Nick. ! ALL: (especially Stan): Get any available fish spawning habitat information (supports A-1B study plan development) to Sue by June 25, or call R-2 (They will pick up!) ! ALL: Get Sue your feedback on Study Plan A-1C by June 25. ! ALL: Get comments to Sue on A-24 by 6/29. ! ALL: Get reservoir fish population data (supports A-03 study plan development) to Sue at earliest convenience. ! Chuck: Summarize A-10 data by September meeting. ! Brady and Others: Get Sue input for A-20 by 6/29. ! Tony: Send map data to Don. ! Fred: Talk with Terrestrial Group re: wetlands that are hydrologically but not directly connected to the river. ! Sue: Put together a one page summary of Type A vs. Type B data measurements/methods by 6/25. ! Nick: Set up a conference call to get direction on level of survey (Type A/B) for A-1a. ! Don: Provide information on cutthroat passage through Cascades to Arnie by June 25. ! Bob: Summarize current water quality data (by August 9 meeting) ! Nick: Coordinate with Forest Service re: A-13 REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS ! Chuck notified team members when delta field survey took place. Sue accompanied him. ! Tony Fuchs reported that PSE is working toward making GIS the medium for their mapping. They are doing a digital terrain model for the reservoir fluctuation zone, in 5 ft. contour intervals. They are using digital topographical information to depict the FERC boundary. PSE is also working with Walker & Associates to create digital ortho photos (from a fly over in 1999). These show everything within the FERC boundary plus 100 meters out. Upper portions of tributaries are not included. There would have to be additional aerial photo Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  2 of 6   ! ! ! !  flights to capture these portions of tributaries. There was a request to have the relic Little Baker included in the area of study. Anyone wanting access to the data relating to the GIS map can make requests to Tony Fuchs at PSE : 425-462-3553. Reminder: these are all still in draft form. Rod: Met with PSE to come up with spill protocol. Arnie: Re-sent the most current version of A-2 for review. Brady: Invited Jim Chu to do presentation on Wild & Scenic River at July meeting. He is available. R-2: Completed Task 1 of R-A01.A by June 30.  STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS/STUDY PLAN DEVELOPMENT Study # Title A01.A Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys A01.B Reservoir Tributary Biological Surveys  A01.C Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys  A02 A03  LB River Habitat Mapping Reservoir Fish Population Characteristics A04 LB/Skagit River Flow, Gaging A09 Skagit River Flow and Habitat Assessment (HIGH PRIORITY) A24: Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  Notes/Next Steps Defer to conference call (decide Type A/B data measurements/methods) Need additional information re: spawning habitats from team members. Get to Arnie by June 25. R-2 will bring map to supplement discussion on 7/12. Distributed study plan and asked for team member feedback by 6/25. This study would address access (passage concerns from head cutting) and sub-surface flow. They hope to do these surveys this year. The group agreed to go ahead with the survey. Need available information from team members so can determine scope of survey. Moving ahead (distributed gage location map). Looking at flows, sediment transport. Will be looking at large woody debris. Will put together a study plan for A-20. Distributed study plan for A24 for comments. Get comments to Sue by 6/29. Sue reported they have some synthesized, unregulated data already. Will have comparison of flows: managed vs. unmanaged and an overall channel network analysis.  3 of 6   A05  A06 A08  A07 A10  A11 A12 A13 A14 A15 A16 A17 A18 A19  Water Quality Sampling  Plan still pending. Still considering data collection methods. Need to identify critical path for sampling fecal coliform. This study ties to water quality certification required for license. UB Passage Design Baffle Modification Completed May 25. Got in 2 weeks of study. UB Passage System Evaluation The study is incomplete due to trouble raising the gates during early trial. Study is ongoing. Data from this preliminary study will help us set up a complete study in 2002. Will see summarized data in August. Lower Baker Forebay Bathymetric Will be done summer of 2001. Survey Baker River Delta Habitat Assessment- On May 10, Chuck, Sue and Doug (at elevation Char of 705 ft.) surveyed passage capability at tributary mouths. In general, they found no passage problems. Chuck will survey on June 15 to get full pool data. Nutrient Addition Parking Lot- not for 2001. Instream Flows for Biodiversity Parked until 2002 and beyond. Water Quality Assessment Keep separate from A05. Reservoir Shoreline Erosion Not for 2001-Needs further development. UB Delta Scour Draft Study Plan is going through internal review at R-2. Lower Baker Delta/Channelization Pending – Not for 2001. Tributaries Surveys Upstream of Coordinate methodology with A01. Barriers Baker River Survey Upstream of 1 km. Merged into A-1A. Review Limnological Information Preview in August  A20 Large Woody Debris Management A21 Skagit Wild & Scenic River Values A22 Baker Lake Trout Impacts Evaluation A23 Baker River Wild & Scenic River Values A24 Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis  Will begin drafting plan in August. Welcome input. Review Study Request for discussion at July meeting. Review Study Request for approval at July 12 meeting. Get comments to Nick. Review Study Request for discussion at July 12 mtg. Study Plan distributed for comments. Comments due to Sue by 6/29.  BRADY’S PRESENTATION ON FEDERAL WATERSHED ANALYSIS Brady Green walked the group through the purpose and content of the Federal Watershed Analysis. His power point presentation is available on the Puget Web Site. This is a working Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  4 of 6   document. Contributors will be asked to give feedback on the draft due to be distributed in July. The “final” version will be available to the public this fall. UPDATE ON PSE OPERATIONS MODEL Bob Barnes reported that they are on schedule for beta testing in August. They anticipate having the final product by the end of September. The model may not be able to explicitly deal with data needs relating to various resource areas. The model will be able to show different stage heights. It lacks an optimization function relating to specific resources. It will optimize under any scenario for power. LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS ! R-2 Consultants - Table 1. Summary of habitat data collected by various authors within tributaries to the Baker River upstream of lower Baker Dam. Includes Type A Data = Quantitative data on stream width, habitat units, substrate and the location and height/length of barriers. Type B Data = Quantitative data on stream width and the location and height/length of barriers. Type C Data = Qualitative description of stream habitat ! R-2 Consultants - Table 2a. Approximate length of channel accessible to anadromous salmonids and proportion for which Type A or B survey data are available in the Lake Shannon sub-basin ! R-2 Consultants - Table 2b. Approximate length of channel accessible to anadromous salmonids and proportion for which Type A or B survey data are available in the Baker Lake sub-basin ! R-2 Consultants – - Table 2c. Approximate length of channel accessible to anadromous salmonids and proportion for which Type A or B survey data are available in the Upper Baker Lake sub-basin ! U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – Chuck Ebel distributed a map entitled: The Baker River System as Fish Habitat ! STREAM NOTES, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, CO, April 2001. R-2 Consultants have a Nature Conservancy video: ! R-2 Consultants - Study Plan A-01.C, Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys ! R-2 Consultants - Map – Location of Staff Gages Installed March 29, 2001 ! R-2 Consultants - Study Plan A-24, Hydrologic and Geomorphic Evaluation of the Baker River ADDITIONAL ISSUES Water Quality/Quantity during planned maintenance outages Water Quality/Quantity during unplanned outages PARKING LOT ! Feedback on “Salmon on the Baker River” document Different perspectives Discuss posting reviews on web ! Chinook Working Group- Skagit River Chinook Recovery Plan ! Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) in fall? Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  5 of 6   ! !  Presentation on ESA (direct relationship to 4(d) Fred/August State agency presentations re: mandates  EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones ! Finished early ! Thanks Ecology for hosting! ! Arnie’s food ! Brady’s presentation ! Tony’s participation ! Got through status of all studies/requests ! Chuck’s presentation ! Use/explanation of maps ! We work hard and get along well ! Opportunities to Improve ! Some side conversations ! Use crop ! Don not always getting information ahead of time ! Paper laden process! Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting July 12, 2001 9:00 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Mountlake Terrace, WA Bring Lunch 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  Review Agenda and Minutes Review Action Items Jim Chu – Wild & Scenic River Presentation Study Requests/Plans Update on PSE Operations model Parking Lot Set Agenda for August 9 (location TBD) Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 6.14.01_fishwg_notes; Lyn Wiltse  6 of 6    2001aquatic20010614.pdf en 