 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group August 9, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Conference Room A/B (425-775-9702) 21905 64th Avenue West, Mountlake Terrace, WA AGENDA 1. Review agenda and minutes 2. Review action items 3. Wild & Scenic River Presentation (Jim Chu, USFS) 4. Continue review of study plans and requests 5. Additional Issues 6. Set agenda for September 13 meeting (location TBD) 7. Evaluate meeting August 9, 2001 Driving Directions to US Forest Service Office: 1) Driving North from Seattle (or South from Everett) on I-5, take the 220th St. SW exit (exit 179). 2) Turn west (right if from southbound I-5, left if from northbound I-5) onto 220th St. SW. 3) Drive west about a block and turn right onto 64th Ave W. 4) The office building is about ¼ block down the street on the right side of the road. Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group August 9, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA MEETING NOTES Aquatics Working Group Mission: “To identify issues and develop solutions and recommendations addressing fish and aquatic resource interests related to the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement.” Fish Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, 425-462-3442, aaspel@puget.com PRESENT: Arnie Aspelund (PSE), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Jon Vanderheyden (U.S.F.S.), Doug Bruland (PSE), Nick Verretto (PSE), Marcus Appy, Sue Madsen and Phil Hilgert (R2 Resource Consultants), Chuck Ebel (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Dick Raisler ( Fidalgo Fly Fishers, WA Council-Federation Fly Fishers), Don Schluter (Trout Unlimited, by phone), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator - PDSA Consulting) Note: If unable to attend meetings, please notify Team Leader. AGENDA August 9, 2001 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Action Items 3. Continue Review of Study Plans & Requests 4. Additional Issues 5. Set Agenda for September 13 meeting (USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA) 6. Evaluate Meeting Baker River Project Relicense 1 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse INTRODUCTIONS: The group welcomed Marcus Appy, newly hired with R2 Resource Consultants, attending for the first time. FUTURE DATES AND LOCATIONS Thursday, Sept. 13, 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at Mountlake Terrace USFS Office. October 11, November 8, meetings – location to be announced. NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Consider 2002 field season study requests. • ALL: Get A15 comments to Sue by August 23! • ALL: Review Jim Chu’s handout (to be distributed by Nick) and be prepared with questions for his presentation (presentation will be rescheduled – cancelled 7/12 due to small audience • Brady: Try to reschedule Jim Chu to September or October meeting and give his handout to Arnie to distribute to team members. • Arnie: Contact Bill Ryan/EPA Hydro at 206-553-8561 to invite him to these meetings. • Fred: Talk with Terrestrial Group re: wetlands that are hydrologically but not directly connected to the river • Nick/Bob: Provide update on PSE plans for gaging of Baker River. • Don: Provide references on information on cutthroat and char passage through Cascades to Arnie. • Arnie: Check with Fred re: ESA presentation at September/October meeting. • Phil: Touch base with Fred Seavey (U.S. Fish & Wildlife) and Bruce Freet (National Park Service) re: potential habitat disturbances during A1. • Sue: Send “final” study plans to Fred and Steve for feedback. • Bob: Summarize current water quality data • Stan: Invite Bob Hayman to present in November (update of Lower Skagit, fall Chinook, etc.). • Fred: Conduct ESA presentation at upcoming Aquatics WG mtg. • Nick: Coordinate with DOE and Forest Service re: A-13 • Nick: Update on new boat and new hip and chest waders for Doug • Jon: Check availability of new USFS Office in Sedro-Woolley for October 11 meeting. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Phil: Put together a timeline for all study plans. • Nick: Brought Study Request A22 to the Recreational Working Group. • Nick: Set up a Technical Working Group to address development of instream flow management agreement. • Nick: Brought color copies of Forest Service land ownership map to the meeting. • Brady: Reserved our September 13th meeting at the Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace. STUDY REQUEST SUBMITTALS/STUDY PLAN DEVELOPMENT Baker River Project Relicense 2 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse Study # Title Notes/Next Steps A01.A Reservoir Tributary Habitat Surveys Finalized study plan after conference call with Technical Working Group. Ready to mobilize, starting tomorrow. Anyone interested in helping out should see Sue. R2 will be doing tributaries that drain into the reservoir (smaller tributaries) in August. They will begin larger tributaries September 7 – 14. A01.B Reservoir Tributary Biological Surveys Phil reported that R2 has been compiling lots of existing data. R2 provided a one – page summary sheet listing incremental levels of biological data. Streams will be categorized using habitat information. That information forms the basis for production potential and will be used in decision making for relicensing. The biological information is anecdotal. We also have data reflecting electrofishing efforts. In 2002 R2 will do presence/ absence surveys to confirm barriers (by snorkeling and maybe electrofishing) above and blow barriers. They are not proposing to do any basin-side snorkleing/electrofishing this year. They may decide to do more intensive biological information gathering down the line, (on a stream-specific basis) A01.C Reservoir Tributary Delta Surveys Sue of R2 reported they have received and incorporated comments on the Study Plan. There is nothing else new. Will finalize Study Plan and give updates as we move forward. A02 LB River Habitat Mapping R2 has set a schedule to do this survey September 19 to 21. They must work with PSE to identify when the plant will be off-line so they can conduct the survey. R2 will keep the agencies posted as to what’s happening and when. A03 Reservoir Fish Population R2 will be checking with WDFW re: variable Characteristics mesh gill net data. They are also seeking other data from PSE. A04 LB/Skagit River Flow, Gaging Sue and Doug verified last weekend that the gages were still operational. They chose two additional locations for water surface elevation areas with broad bars on both banks. These data will supplement the data gathered at the gage sites. Sue will plot the data for review at our September meeting She will continue with Baker River Project Relicense 3 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse the gages as long as possible (past September). She’ll also update the map of the sites. A05 Water Quality Sampling Nick is still drafting this request. He will coordinate with Ecology and USFS. A06 UB Passage Design Baffle Complete! Modification The last Fish Passage Technical Working A08 UB Passage System Evaluation Group was August 1. The next meetings are 9/5 and 10/15. All meetings are from 9:00 to 3:00 p.m. at Sea-Tac. At the last meeting, the two discussions were: Initial discussions around upstream fish passage, and Review all existing passage data and evaluate conceptual alternatives (26 so far!) All upstream passage alternatives will be looked at. Chuck suggested they contact John Nessler as a reference. They are currently setting up a baffle study design for 2002. 2001 data were inconclusive. Nick will share the completed study results with this group at our September meeting. We are lacking good data on fish behavior. We will be doing tagging studies in 2002. A07 Lower Baker Forebay Bathymetric Complete! Conceptual designs, modeling and Survey cost estimates are underway. PSE will eventually produce maps from these data. These data will be utilized by the Fish Passage Technical Working Group. A09 Skagit River Flow and Habitat Conducting hydrologic and operations Assessment (HIGH PRIORITY) analyses. Internal discussions within PSE are underway. The idea is to come up with a negotiated settlement on instream flows. The “light at the end of the tunnel” on this needs to be clear by this fall. (Will be looking at hourly, daily, and seasonal flows) Need to identify/ compartmentalize out- standing issues e.g., needing more data in rearing habitat availability at varying stages. A10 Baker River Delta Habitat Assessment- Complete! Chuck has summarized these data. Char He will present the results at our September meeting re: 1) Tributary passage survey (no obvious passage problems); 2) Actual potential spawning habitat survey of delta; and 3) US Fish & Wildlife char snorkling surveys (found 8 char - all above the flood control drawdown area). The Corps’ opinion is that no char are spawning in the flood control drawdown zone. Baker River Project Relicense 4 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse A11 Nutrient Addition Nothing new. Is Brady working with Bill Reinard on this? We’ll get an oral review of this in December? A12 Instream Flows for Bio-diversity Check negotiated settlements if they don’t address your interests/concerns. A12 is a placeholder to ensure your concerns are addressed. A13 Water Quality Assessment Nothing new. A14 Reservoir Shoreline Erosion Nothing new. A15 UB Delta Scour Making progress. R2 distributed a Draft Study Plan for the group to review. Sue walked us through the Study Plan. This considers the entire delta area and how operations are affecting scour. This is very complex because we are on a delta landform (always contains depositional areas). Lateral mobility of the channel and incision as the reservoir levels drop are the scour issues on the delta. R2 will do longitudinal profiles and check for scour hoping to capture change at approximately 5 ft. intervals. It’s hard to trace scour back to flood events because there are so many interdependencies. Won’t be able to quantify the effect of scour on redds. R2 will also consider data from A24 and hope to come up with an assessment of the relative risk between a regulated and unregulated system. They will have to do a literature review to assist in this analysis of risk assessment. Sue walked through the individual tasks suggested in the study. She anticipates giving an oral report in May. The questions this report will answer are narrowly defined: 1. Does incision occur in response to reservoir drawdown ? If so, how deep? 2. Is scour that occurs sufficient to affect redds? 3. Is the proportion of fish using this habitat different from unregulated conditions? A16 LB Delta/Channelization Pending – Not for 2001. Will develop study Plan based on A24 A17 Tributaries Surveys Upstream of Still pending. Barriers A18 Baker River Survey Upstream of 1 km. Merged into A-01 Baker River Project Relicense 5 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse A19 Review Limnological Information Pending with A13 A20 Large Woody Debris Management Expect to have outline and an issue identification discussion at our September meeting. A21 Skagit Wild & Scenic River Values Pending. A22 Baker Lake Trout Impacts Evaluation Current management direction of this program is changing. More stocking is shifting back to Depression Lake and may be eliminating stocking of Baker Lake altogether. Stay tuned. A23 Baker River Wild & Scenic River Pending Values A24 Hydrologic and Geomorphic Analysis Sue of R2 got field data to support sediment transport analyses. Sue will button up with Brady on this. Will also check out photos available in Olympia. The extent of the analysis is varied - Hydrology: Baker and Skagit (down to Sedro Woolley) Sediment transport: historic/current Baker R. Photo analysis: Baker and Skagit LIST OF MEETING HANDOUTS • Skagit Wild & Scenic River Corridor below Baker River (color map. June 13, 2001 USDA Forest Service, Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest, Geographic Information Resource Team) • Master Schedule of Hydrology and Aquatic Resource Tasks, Baker River Project (FERC No. 2150) • Material Safety Data Sheet on Chemical Grout compound used at Lower Baker • Draft Study Plan for A-15 Upper Baker Delta Scour and Fill Study • Summary of Incremental Level of Biological Information pertinent to addressing A01b- Reservior Tributary Biological Surveys • WAC rule defining Best Available Science ADDITIONAL ISSUES 2002 Field Season Study Requests: • Areas of Unnatural Predation Opportunity • Reservoir Limnology Study (sockeye/coho production potential) • Effects of reservoir management on downstream passage • Miscellaneous tagging studies • Location and depth of Middle Skagit spawning Ramping rates: The new runner installed at Lower Baker is less flexible in terms of ramping than the previous unit. In 1978, PSE agreed to provide limits on ramping at Lower Baker. Discussions are Baker River Project Relicense 6 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse ongoing. PSE has just finished testing limitations of the new runner. We will get an update on this at our September meeting. Grouting Compound: Dick distributed a handout outlining additional research he conducted re: the ingredients of the grouting compound PSE was using. Subject: Documentation of material used to repair a leak in Lower Baker Dam. Copies of the Material Data Safety Sheet provided by 3M Manufactures. Doug stated that test fish in cages had no toxic reaction to the compound (they lived). Best Available Science: Phil provided a handout of the State definition of Best Available Science. PARKING LOT • Presentation on Northwest Forest Plan including Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (USFS) in fall? • Presentation on ESA (direct relationship to 4(d) ) Fred/August • State agency presentations re: mandates (agency direction) • Create a master list of possible studies across all working groups and share with all • Access to the Baker River Project hourly operational model EVALUATION OF MEETING Well-Dones • Food and drink outstanding • Smoked salmon from Sue • Studies Timeline was terrific • Finished early • Scour discussion • Laughter Opportunities to Improve • Tentative Agenda for Next Meeting September 13, 2001 9:00 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. US Forest Service Office Sedro-Woolley, WA 1. Review Agenda and Minutes 2. Review Action Items 3. Report from Fish Passage Technical Working Group 4. Start Review of Study Requests/Plans 5. Presentations • Char Delta Survey Results - Chuck • ESA – Fred Seavey? • Wild and Scenic Rivers – Jim Chu? 6. Additional Issues • Update on ramping rates Baker River Project Relicense 7 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse • Others? 7. Set Agenda for October 11 meeting (USFS Office in Sedro-Woolley?) and determine location for November meeting 8. Evaluate Meeting Baker River Project Relicense 8 of 8 Fish and Aquatic Resources Working Group File: 8-9-01_Final_fishWG_notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  