MEETING MINUTES Upstream and Downstream Fish Passage Technical Working Group Mission Statement: To develop an efficient fish passage design for the Baker River Project. Project:  Baker River Project FERC No. 2150  Written By:  Kim Lane  Meeting Date:  May 7, 2002  Location:  Upper Baker Lodge, Baker River Project  Attendees:  Ken Bates WDFW Dee Endelman, AD Cary Feldmann, PSE Steve Fransen, NMFS Brady Green, USFS MaryLouise Keefe, MWH Kim Lane, PSE  Purpose:  The purpose of the meeting was to continue development of conceptual design alternatives required for evaluation of downstream and upstream fish passage facilities in the course of relicensing the Baker River Hydroelectric Project, and to select an alternative for upstream passage.  Ed Meyer, NMFS Wayne Porter, PSE Don Schluter, TU (conference line) Gary Sprague, WDFW Jim Stow, USFWS Nick Verretto, PSE Stan Walsh, SSC  Future meeting dates: July 9, Tuesday, 9 a.m. conference call to discuss biological studies/ phone no. 1-866-280-6429 (144995#) August 6, Tuesday, 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - passage design at Sea-Tac September 11 Wednesday, 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - passage design at Sea-Tac Item 5.1a  Description Report on Completed Action Items:  5.1b  Carry-over Action Items  Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002  Description Refer to notes from last meeting: • A site visit was conducted of Lower and Upper Baker areas. • A weekly studies update call was conducted on May 6, 2002. • Mort - Modified the summary of alternative tables per comments and sorted the tables first by alternative and then chronologically. He e-mailed the group after incorporating these changes. • Ken - “Invited” (gave access to) Nick, Mort and Kim to review the documentation web site. • Mort - Continued advancing design alternatives LB F.9 & F.10, LB FL.6 & FL.7 for the next meeting. • Mort - Discussed UB FL.6 design limitations with a structural engineer. • Mort - Advanced designs U2.1 & U2.2, U3.1 & U3.2. • Kim - E-mailed upstream destination matrix spread sheets to group for review. • Nick - Design of the PSE fish truck is in progress. A discussion will take place at a future meeting. (item 5.16 below) • Don - Contact Trout Unlimited office regarding the organization’s position on acceptance of trap-and-haul alternative and need for fish ladder/volitional passage. • Nick – Will bring upstream correlation matrix issue to "flows” group and meet with Brian (MWH), Sue and Phil (R2). • Nick - Coordinate visit of Howard Hansen physical model after the May meeting. Contact Chick Sweeney of ENSR or Fred Goetz of ACE. • Don – Researched basis of tram at Cowlitz and current status. Page 1 of 5  Action, By All – will participate in weekly studies update calls.   Item  Description  Description Don - Report back regarding Trout Unlimited’s position on removal of ladder. • Destination matrix will be addressed at a future meeting. • Nick – to contact TU and American Rivers. • Dee – to contact Don. The items distributed at the meeting were: May 7, 2002 agenda (PSE), April 2, 2002 meeting minutes (PSE), working group list (PSE), studies coordination summary sheets (PSE), upstream and downstream technical memo tracking documents (MWH), upstream & downstream alternatives tracking documents (MWH), studies information tracking document (MWH), summary of Ken’s document tracking method (MWH), Draft TM Rev. 1 Alt. LB FL.3 (barge 20%), Draft TM Alt. LB FL.7 (MIS 60%), Draft TM Alt. UB FL.6 (MIS full); LB FL.3.0), LB FL.7.0 LB FL.6.0, LB F.9.0, LB F.6.0, UB FL.7.0, U2.1, U2.2 U3.1 , U3.2.  Action, By  •  5.2  5.3  Technical Memo Distribution  Biological Studies Update  MaryLou reported on studies in progress. Radio tag studies are to be moved to next week due to insufficient numbers of fish available for tagging. No kelts were attracted to gulper acoustic-tagging fish will be held for 24 hours to allow for a full five days to track. Fish are not moving as we had hoped due to low flows since it is too cold for ice to melt. Due to low fish collections at trap, choice of coho for study wil be 1) wild 1+, 2) wild 2+, 3) previously marked 2+, 4) previously marked 2+ 4) net pen fish from LB.  Mort and Nick are to draft a letter summarizing upstream design selection and email to Don Dee: is to call Don regarding upstream design selection. Progress report at next meeting.  A good number of marked fish, which were put up in the reservoir to measure gulper efficiency, are coming out now. They have easily identifiable freeze brands. Also could not get enough fish to radio tag in one day, only 11 fish in two days (22 required). Will capture tag and release over two days.  5.4  Technical Memo Tracking Log  Nick – Discussion on Biological Studies Update; had one meeting and will have several more weekly updates. Data management system was discussed. Quickbase was examined by Mort who reviewed limitations of this software system. MWH and PSE are examining alternative MS portal based systems for a more permanent comment tracking system. Quickbase has a limit of 550MB, which would fill up very quickly. Mort - Revised and issued templates of technical memo status. Ken Bates sent out an invite for web based document system.  5.5  Charles Howard Model  Will have a workshop June 12th at PSE’s Bellevue office. Hope to have some trail criteria before then. This workshop will allow attendees to get experience with the model.  5.6  Review of Draft TM Rev. 1 LB FL.3  Reservoir Fish Attraction Barge / 20% Flow / 0.4 fps. LB FL3 was presented Rev 1, which has a control weir with pumps and based on MaryLou's work one will be able to determine depth and location of fish. The location of the barrier net appears to be in good condition based upon today’s site visit. The side discharge which avoids thrust may set up eddies that could affect attraction. It would be better to reduce vibration and consider alternative ways to  Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002  Page 2 of 5  A trial use of Quickbase is proposed to determine features that are important in Portal system. Mort and Kim to set up a plan on the EDM system and report by next meeting.   Item  Description  Description separate pumps from main structure.  Action, By  Last item discussed was to upgrade electrical feed due to size of motors (1 MW). 5.7  Review of Alternative LB FL.7  MIS / 60% Flow / High Velocity LB FL7 rev 1 60% MIS uses up to 3000 cfs. Fig 1 new extension of penstock on bench to area by net. Fig 2 showed plans of MIS Screens. 50 cfs per screen on bypass with 3 screens this system becomes very complex. Includes a floating system with cable guides to raise and lower screens. Length of MIS is related to flow, a 35-foot screen will have a 700-cfs flow and is the largest system designed to date. The largest built is thought to be around 500 cfs. Width of channel is a concern because it may create hydraulic conditions that are not fish friendly. Cleaning of MIS is done by rotating the screens and allowing the material caught on a screen to flow into the penstock. Hydraulic model and balancing of the system will be a large concern in its design as well as a biological study of the systems effectiveness. Need to focus on what would be the limitations of such a system for Upper and Lower Baker and also need a determination of the size of the fish. Jim suggested a V-shaped crowder that would raise and crowd fish and then flip to a vertical position for the return down.  5.8  Review of Alternative LB FL.6  MIS / Full Flow (5000 cfs ) / High Velocity DS LB FL.6 Full Flow MIS alternative, a very large and wide structure which utilizes attraction water pumps.  Review of Alternative UB FL6  Don suggested a snake-like staggered plan for bypass pipeline, which would be a more natural means of transport. However this is a transportation option and the alternative is focused on collection issues. UB FL6 was briefly presented and it is similar in scope and comments to UB F9. DOWNSTREAM ALTERNATIVE MATRIX (Lower Baker) was presented by Mort so the group could get an understanding of the matrix and how it tracks status of Technical Memos.  5.9  Review of Alternative LB F.9  5.11  Summarization of Remaining Upstream  Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002  1. MIS / Full Flow (5000 cfs ) / High Velocity LB F9 is a system that uses submergible travelling screens and guides fish into a hopper. Fig 3 shows this feature and how fish would move over weir into raceways. Fish go into an up well where they are transported out to weir and into collection pen. Mort reviewed existing alternatives using upstream alternatives memo tracking summary document. Page 3 of 5  Group does not see any fatal flaw with this alternative. If a decision is made to advance with it then fish size needs to be taken into consideration as it relates to the design of the structure. For example, smaller fish such as fry would require a much longer facility. Mort will research the largest screen that would still be a practical alternative.   Item 5.12 5.13 5.14 5.15  Description Alternatives, TMs Review of AlternativeU2.1 and U2.2 Review of Alternative U3.1 Review of Alternative U3.2 Upstream Alternative Selection and Discussion  Description Reviewed see item 5.15 below Reviewed see item 5.15 below Reviewed see item 5.15 below All upstream alternatives were reviewed and discussed extensivly. These alternative are U1.1 – LB/UB Fluctuating Pool Fish Ladder U1.2 – LB/UB Fixed Pool Fish Ladder U1.3 – Barrier Dam /Upper Baker Fish Ladder and Channel U2.1 – Trap and Haul at Barrier Dam U2.2 – Trap and Haul at both Barrier Dam and Upper Baker Dam U.3.1. and U3.2 – Combination Trap and Haul, Fish Tramway and Fish Locks. Alteratives U1.1 - .3 were not carried forward due to decision by group that a fish ladder would have negative impact in seveeal areas on fish passage. There are many concerns with alternative U2.2 and U3.3 and U3.2, which are listed below. Decision was made to advance Alterantive 2.1 and not advance other upstream alternatives for the below reasons. 1  Delay and loss of adults moving through the reservoir, possible straying of fish.  2.  There is very minimal (lack of) spawning and rearing habitat in Lake Shannon tributaries.  3.  Trapping fish at both locations would .result in handling fish twice for transit to upper reservoir.  4.  Forced migration would increase stress from abrupt changes in physical and biological conditions.  5.  Losses of fish due to fall back of fish due to spill.  6.  Water Quality due to flow and temperature created fish losses.  7.  Reservoir transit time compared to being trucked.  8.  Environmental impacts of building two facilities instead of one.  9.  Additional mechanical complexity with other alternatives.  10. Additional complexity adds to risk of failure of other alternatives. 11. Other alternatives do not allow for out of basin transport therefore a truck would still be required. 12. No one knows of a system with vertical lift. 13. Other alternatives are at risk of failure due to landslides or other possible acts of god.  Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002  Page 4 of 5  Action, By   Item  Description  Description 14. Char and trout connectivity can be accommodated by the use of a portable trap at upstream end of Lake Shannon Summary:, For the reasons cited above the group has decided to advance a trap and haul alternative to be located at Lower Baker Dam, as defined in U2.1. This agreement will be formalized in more detail with documentation to be provided by MWH. At next meeting Group will meet then to provide consensus to a technical memorandum that will state reasoning for advancement of alternative 2.1.  5.16  Other Issues  5.17  Meeting Evaluation, Review Assignments  5.18  Next Meetings, Facilitation  •  Fish truck - no additional design information on fish truck was available for this meeting. • Charles Howard Model - Full-day workshop scheduled June 12 at PSE Bellevue office. • Coordination of visit for Howard Hansen physical model will occur after the May meeting. Positive: Good facilitation. Everyone worked hard. Decisions were made. Location not at SeaTac. Field visit completed. Negative: Trying to make phone work- distracting. June 4th Tentative Meeting Agenda, 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. @ WestCoast SeaTac Hotel (CANCELLED) Review agenda & handouts Administrative tracking procedures development Downstream Passage Review minutes & action items Biological studies update Summarize remaining alternatives, TMs Designs review – LB FL.3 & .7 & .6, F.9 & F.10, UB FL.7 Discussion of 3 downstream options (2 LB, 1 UB) maybe “part of shelf.” Trout and Char traps Upstream Passage Review minutes & action items Review remaining alternatives & TMs Designs review – U2.1 &2.2 & 3.1 & 3.2 Upstream alternative selection and discussion Fish transport destination matrix development Develop design of U2.1 Other issues – fish truck, operations model Evaluate meeting & review assignments Schedule next meetings, agenda, and facilitation  Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002  Page 5 of 5  Action, By    2002fish20020507.pdf en 