BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group Meeting October 24, 2002 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702)  AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda/action items PME Matrix Development Solution Team Update Report on Studies: • Status of existing studies: T2, T4 (new species?), T5, T7, T11, T13, T15, T16, T17 • New study plans: T6 Noxious Weeds, T7b Future Vegetation • Existing/New Requests – T19 HEP New Study Plans for Review- T20 Drawdown wildlife, T21 Elk, T22 Fluctuation Zone Enhancement How are we going to evaluate our data? New Study Requests (?), New Teamlet meetings (?) Set agenda/location for November 21st, December 19th meeting location Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group October 24, 2002 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) FINAL MEETING MINUTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations, addressing terrestrial and wildlife resource interests for the Baker River Project and its operations, leading to a settlement agreement that: 1. accurately defines and describes the existing environment in relationship to the previous environment; 2. identifies project effects (existing and proposed) leading to development of protection, mitigation, and enhancement options.” Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, (Phone) 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com ATTENDEES: Stan Walsh (Skagit Systems Cooperative), Laurel Shiner (Whatcom Co. Noxious Weed Control Board), Bob Nelson, (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Gene Stagner (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann (Puget Sound Energy), Kathleen W. Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates, Inc. for Louis-Berger), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Ann Risvold and Don Gay (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific Environmental Sciences, Inc.), Tom Hamer and Erin Colclazier (Hamer Environmental), Dee Endelman and Bruce Freet (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting, facilitator). SCHEDULE FOR FUTURE WORKING GROUP MEETINGS: Regular meeting: November 21, Dec. 19 from 8:30 to 2:00 at the USFS Building, Mountlake Terrace. PME meetings: November 8 and Dec. 5 in Lacey (Sawyer Hall) Introductions We welcomed Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates, Inc. for Louis-Berger who PSE has hired to write the PDEA). She will be sitting in on these meetings from time to time.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1 of 5   Agenda for October 24, 2002, 8:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Mountlake Terrace, WA Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1.Review notes/agenda/action items 1. PME Matrix development 2. Report from Elk Teamlet (T21); HEP Teamlet (T19) 3. Studies: T4, T5, T7,T11,T13, T15, T16, T17 New Study Plans: T6 (Noxious Weeds), T7b (Future vegetation) Existing New Requests 4. New Study Plans for Review T20 Drawdown Wildlife Survey T22 Flux Zone Enhancement 6. Solution Team Update 7.Set agenda and location for November 21st and December 19th meeting 8. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Get comments to Marty on T7 by November 7. • ALL: Provide comments on Draft Final Rare Plant Report and T17 Amphibian Draft Report by November 21st. • ALL: Let Dee know if you have any concerns with the PME matrix by end of day Monday, October 28. • Tony: Follow-up with Bob re: NPS wetland maps. • Tom: Ask Lia to talk with Marty re: updating Analysis Species rationale. • Tony: Set up Basin Vegetation Map teamlet (T15) with Don, Marty, Joetta, Ron and maybe Lauri after September 24. • Marty: Send out suggested list of PMEs for review by end of day on October 31 (using format suggested by Bruce). • Tony: Send out PME format to all (delete “PME” section). • Tony: Check with Joetta re: grizzly cover for Elk. • Patrick: Bring his photos from trip to France. • Tony: Set up Elk Teamlet conference call. • Tony: Set up HEP teamlet meeting in early December. • Erin: Send revised version of T2 sample classifications to Tony to distribute. • Tony: Attach to minutes an updated status list of all studies with the most recent revision date. • Cary: Investigate setting up an internal “protected” web site location that members can access to review study drafts. • Tony: Will send out notification e-mails when T7 and T15 coverages are ready for final review. • Don: Send out potential draft of PME for mountain goats for our review prior to the next meeting. Use the format distributed by Bruce. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Gave Tom Hamer feedback re: T7, T13 and T4 (Analysis species list) by Oct. 3. • ALL: Went through (updated) matrix and scored it. Noted those you have concerns with. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2 of 5   • • • • • •  Lauri: Sent Project ortho photos to Tony. Dee: Sent out revised (updated) matrix by Oct. 3. Ann: Checked with Don about attending Dec. 5 PME meeting. Gene: Sent driving directions and room location for Sawyer Hall meeting in Lacey for PME session. Tom: Changed T5 spreadsheet to include new column for certainty of hydrologic connection. Tony/Lauri: Worked with Frank re: MOU for PHS information on listed species.  PME MATRIX UPDATE Dee distributed an updated version of the Terrestrial matrix for potential PMEs. All are encouraged to review the list and let Dee know by the end of the work-day Monday (Oct. 28) if they have any concerns. She walked us through a summary she had written up to share with the Solution Team. We edited the summary. Bruce shared with us a high-level view of the schedule relating to PMEs. He discussed putting first draft of PMEs together starting in November. There will be workshops in February 2003 to discuss how to resolve issues across resource areas to put together the second draft (management plans). Second draft PME’s would be put together in March 2003, if possible. The PDEA process is starting now (PSE had hired Louis-Berger to perform this function and Kathy Smayda (developing the terrestrial sections) will be attending key meetings). FERC will probably request Preliminary Terms, Conditions, and Recommendations in October 2003, and the Final Terms, Conditions, and Recommendations due in June 2004. Sections and articles for the Settlement Agreement will be turned in with the License application by April 2004. Marty will send out a first cut at PMEs using the format suggested by Bruce by October 31. This will give us a week to review it before meeting November 8 at Lacey to work on these. Study # T2  Title  Notes/Next Steps  Vegetation Mapping in Project Area  T4  Analysis Species Assessment  T5  Wetland Inventory Study  Erin Colclazier (Hamer Associates) provided an update on upland map corrections, drawdown zone plant classifications, and completion date. All species reviews will be completed by November (4 weeks). These will be treated a dynamic documents. The reviews will be completed by 21 November (4 weeks). To date, reviews of 17 species have been drafted. Nine species have been completed and sent out to the committee, 4 species are currently being edited and 4 species are in the process of being reviewed. This leaves us with 16 species to complete. All this information will be archived in a public document room at PSE. We agreed to add two new species: Beller’s Ground Beetle and Hatch’s Click Beetle. WDFW has PHS management recommendations for each of these species. Tom Hamer will review these. The results of this study will be integrated into the T2  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3 of 5   T6  Noxious Weed Assessment and Control Plan  T7  Historic Vegetation of the UB and LB Projects  T7b  Future vegetation mapping  T-9,10  Recreation use, effects on Mt. Goat Habitat use  T11  Oregon Spotted Frog Inventory  R-T12  Grizzly Bear Spring Foraging Habitat Value  T13  Survey and Manage Terrestrial Mollusk Survey Basin Vegetation Mapping  T15  T16 T17  Project Area Rare Plant Survey Amphibian Studies in Reservoir Fluctuation Zone  project vegetation mapping and study report. The nearly Final Study Plan has been completed and sent to committee. Final comments from Laurel and Ann will be incorporated and a Final Study Plan report, which should be final by our November 21 meeting. A Draft Final Report was distributed. All were asked to get comments to Marty by November 7. Marty pointed out that the definition of “riparian” is within 50 feet of stream edge for T7 and within 100 feet for T15. He also explained that the flood plain for Baker was derived from 1952 USGS topo map along with maps done in 1956 and 1959. Marty got assumptions on road densities from R2. He is assuming that PSE would sell its land to Crown Pacific – so it would stay vegetated as industrial forest land. He is also incorporating assumptions on seral stage growth. Marty will put together some future scenarios along with these assumptions for our review at our November 21 meeting. We have high country use information from the visitor surveys conducted by the Recreation Working Group during the summer of 2001. It includes an estimate of the Baker Lake overnight users that also visit the high country. We will discuss the next steps (mountain goat-related PME?) at our next meeting. Final report completed and sent out for review. It doesn’t appear that there are any in the basin. The report should be final by our November 21st meeting. On hold depending on T15 and working group needs. Don emailed a write-up outlining the study need for our review by October 24th and we were to discuss at our October meeting. This has been deferred for discussion at the November 21st meeting. Final report completed and sent out for review. The report should be final by our November 21 meeting. Tony showed us the current versions of the Seral Stage and Major Vegetation Cover type maps. We discussed how to make the legends more specific (clear definitions for both maps) for the Seral Stage maps. We will replace “riparian” with the appropriate cover type. We will re- look at riparian in the future to make sure it makes sense. Draft Final report completed and sent out for review. The Draft Final report is complete except distributional information. Joetta Zablotney plans to have the amphibian species distribution maps completed by this Friday (25 October) and the report is estimated to be complete by the week of the 28th of October and sent to the committee.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4 of 5   R-T18 R-T19  Breeding Bird Surveys Habitat Evaluation Studies  On hold. The HEP teamlet met September 24 and via conference call October 18. They agreed the group could use HEP as a monitoring tool to evaluate PME success. We also agreed that we need a methodology to analyze/interpret data from studies in order to come up with PMEs for a Settlement Agreement. We might look at using modified HSI parameters to see what would be needed. STEPS defined at the conference call: 1. Finish the T7b study 2. Use the analysis species literature reviews to determine what habitats are important to the analysis species. 3. Compare the results of T7b to the analysis species literature reviews to select/prioritize species for a habitat assessment 4. Develop any additional information on the habitat requirements of the analysis species needed to conduct a habitat assessment. 5. Conduct a habitat assessment. 6. Use the results of the habitat assessment to guide PME development.. Concern was expressed about trading off precision (ground truthing, possibly species by species) for the sake of meeting a schedule for PMEs. The teamlet will meet again in early December to flesh out the assessment approach. This will occur after we get the data from T4 and T7b (November 21).  RT20  A Draft Plan will be ready for review October 25.  RT21  Wildlife Use in the Reservoir Drawdown Zone Elk studies  T22  Fluctuation Zone Enhancement  All have until October 28 to submit comments on the Elk Study Plan to Tony. There was discussion around the intent of the study, the scope and how we would use the results. Could we use this to start to put together a management plan for the life of the license? The existing amount of the elk forage in the Project area is available through T2. We also have supplemental information in T7b and T15. We may limit the elk study to the Baker Basin to speed up the GIS work. The elk teamlet will meet again (via conference call November 13th) to work through these issues so we can get Ron Tressler (EDAW) on board and with clear direction. Tony will coordinate the initial drafting of this report. We will look at having the literature review complete by yearend.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5 of 5   HANDOUTS • Terrestrial Working Group Draft #7: PME Options Evaluation, October 10,2002 • Preliminary PME Options, Terrestrial Resources Working Group Summary, October 30, 2002 • Hydroelectric Project Websites • Protection, Mitigation, and Enhancement Measures, Submitted by the Participant for Baker River Hydroelectric Project No. 2150 • Common PME Measures Appearing in the Baker River Working Groups • Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group HEP Teamlet Conference Call minutes. • T2 Vegetation Classifications for Inundation Zone Grass/Sedge Polygons 10-24-2002. PARKING LOT • Conceptual Mitigation Approach (PMEs) • Review time frame/goals of working groups/milestones • Definitions of “project boundary”, “project effects”, “previous environment”, “project area”, NEPA definitions • Watershed Analysis Presentation • Land Management – Do study? • Make list of all available relevant data. Create a subset of those data for Tony to always bring to meetings for group to continually reference. • Are transmission lines in or out of FERC boundary? • Changing Climate Patterns • Determine land management allocations within Project boundary • Interface with Access Management Plan MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Great attendance! • Don’s noises • Welcome Kathy! • Great maps • Nice photos from Erin’s journeys! • Got out early Opportunities to Improve • Don’s noises • Missed Bob Kuntz WHAT’S HOT? • PME timeline • Getting studies done on time • We are! TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR OUR NOVEMBER 21st MEETING BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6 of 5   Mountlake Terrace, Washington 8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Bring a sack lunch and we’ll work through! 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.  Review notes/agenda/action items PME Matrix development Solution Team Update Studies: T12, T9, T10, T21…TONY TO FILL IN!!! New study plans for review New Requests? Set agenda and location for December 19th meeting Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 10/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Lyn Wiltse for Terrestrial Technical Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7 of 5    2002wildlife20021024.pdf en 