 Baker Project Cultural and Historic BesourcesWorkin2 GrouD IssuesDiscussionMeetine Sue:e:estedA2enda: December9. 2002 Purpose of this meetint!: To preparefor crossresom-ce meetingsin March by discussing resourceissues,impacts& potentialsolutionsso that the Cultural Groupwill be better ableto: . Explain its concernsto otherresourceworking groups; . Review, for cultural concerns,the PME's being developedby the other working groups;and . Focusits discussionsaboutthe developmentof a Cultural ResourcesManagement Plan,per Section106. Desired Outcomes: . A list of the resourceissuesandimpactsof concernto working groupmembers . Thoughtson protection,mitigation,and/orenhancementof resourcesof concern . Ideasaboutcrossresourceimplicationsregardingresourceissuesof concern . Thoughtson what needsto be communicatedto otherworking groups& the SolutionTeam . A Dlanfor next steos I Time i Tooic I WelcoIne:ag--;e;nifa review an~dUCtions I F-acili~torFeedback:TI~'! -whatwe~<ierstan~ theissueS-So (~ 1:30 p.m. Introductionto dialogueon resources . How will informationfrom this dialoguebe used? . This is a dialogueaboutideas-no one is committing their tribe..agency -- or comoanyto any srecific outcome-- 1:45 p.rn Dialogueon resources:What kind of impactsarewe concerned about? On: . Archeologicalsites . Historic buildingsand structures . TraditionalCultural Propertyandsacredsites 12:30~ ~:Bre"ak '-continued --1m -- - ~ I 2:40 p.m. 3:00p.m. Dialogueon resources:What canwe do aboutthesepotential impacts? . How canwe protectthe resources? . What arepossiblemitigation measures? . How miJ1;htwe enhancethe resources? I 4:00 p.m. rBreak 4:10p.m. Wheredo we go from here? . Writing up the resultsoftoday's discussion . Communicatingwith other groups . Action_Ql~ I 5:00~.m. I Adjourn BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group PME Meeting December 9, 2002 12:30 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. Baker Lodge MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jpiper@puget.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy), Bruce Freet and Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Scott Schuyler and Cliff Edwards (Upper Skagit Tribe), Frank Winchell by phone (FERC), Rob Whitlam (WA Office Archaeology & Historic Preservation), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Bob Mierendorf and Ryan Booth (National Park Service), Lyn Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) MEETING ANNOUNCEMENT There will be a cross-working group meeting during the first week in March 2003. Part of our purpose in meeting today is to prepare for the cross resource meeting so we will be able to articulate our interests clearly to other working groups. The meeting in March will also provide us an opportunity to review (from a cultural perspective) the preliminary PMEs being proposed by other Working Groups. AGENDA FOR DECEMBER 9 - BAKER LODGE 1. Review agenda and introductions 2. Facilitator feedback: Understanding of issues so far 3. Introduction to dialogue on resources • How will this information be used? • This is a dialogue about ideas- no one is committing their organization to any specific outcome. 4. Dialogue on resources • Archaeological sites BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 12-9-02 PME MEETING Page 1 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Historic buildings • TCPs and sacred sites 5. Dialogue on resources • How can we protect/mitigate/enhance the resources 6. Where do we go from here? • Writing up results from today’s discussions • Communicating with other groups • Action Plan NEW ACTION ITEMS • Lyn: Type up notes and send to Dee. • Jessie: Pull descriptions of legal context for the work of this group and send to Dee. • Dee: Revise list of issues, etc. based on notes from today’s meeting, incorporate legal references from Jessie. • Jessie: Send out notes from this meeting to working group members to review prior to next working group meeting on January 14 (with revised list of issues, other handouts, legal references, etc.). • Scott: Pull together list of tribal issues associated with PMEs (to present at January 14 Working Group Meeting.). • Bruce and Dee: At January 14 meeting brief group on PMEs of interest from other working group. INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed Cliff Edwards, member of Upper Skagit Tribal Council. LIST OF ISSUES We reviewed/revised a preliminary list of issues put together by Dee with input from Ardis and Jessie. We added: • Resources to Protect: Wildlife (including mountain goats which are considered sacred to the Sauk- Suattle. Scott noted that all wildlife including also elk, deer, and bears are considered sacred to the Upper Skagit Tribe. • Plan Development: Monitoring in the future (comprehensive). • Resources to Protect: Preservation of historic properties. • Treaty resources: On USFS lands interested in protecting/enhancing these. • Cultural associations with wildlife, fish, vegetation (Scott would like to define more for the group). • Organize to explain how we’re different and how what we do fits in with other working groups. • Effects of reservoirs: Chemical alterations (saturation, etc.), physical displacement/transportation, erosion an deposition, physical alteration (water wear) of artifacts (dependent on material type), seasonal access to cultural sites, changing the defining features or characteristics of historic places and TCPs • Impacts: TCP introduces a whole range of impacts we can’t capture at this point (awaiting survey results) e.g., sites whose values include solitude- recreationists, etc. could disturb. • Vision site- changes in view shed • Hot springs - increase in visitors (example of impacts to culturally-important areas). BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 12-9-02 PME MEETING Page 2 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 RESOURCES: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES • Stabilize sites • Restrict accessibility (physical, re-route, educate, etc.) • Data recovery (excavation, detailed descriptions, photo documentation) • Decide improvement through consultation process • Confidentiality of sites • Re-design/alter project (for avoidance) • Engineer an armoring/protection • Education/public awareness • Patrolling sites • Monitoring (video surveillance) • Scheduled visits/record • Develop GIS database (erosion) • Curation (long-term, permanent preservation) • Training (staff, tribes) RESOURCES: HISTORIC BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES (ARCHITECTURE) • Move them • Adaptive re-use (e.g., school to community, etc.) RESOURCES: TCPS/SACRED SITES • Confidentiality • Enhancing resources (e.g., planting certain plants, prescribed burning, habitat improvements) • Restricting access/enhancing access • Maintaining tribal access • Ongoing consultation with tribes • Redesign projects (scheduling timing to not impact cultural rite) • Public awareness/education – e.g., cultural aspects of plants and goats • Financial remuneration to tribes TRAILS, ETC. • Maintain historic trails with significant design characteristics • Replacing/reconstructing footbridge • Enhancing species (e.g., re-establishing huckleberry fields) • Land acquisition for habitat • Unanticipated discoveries /plan (being done) • Monitoring • Training of staff • Protocol • Ongoing consultation with tribes BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 12-9-02 PME MEETING Page 3 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 COMPLIANCE • Forest laws (Mt. Baker/Snoqualmie Forest Plan as amended) PLAN DEVELOPMENT • Dispute resolution procedure • Implementation Group • Repatriation • Curation Plan • We need to develop a curation plan • It needs to consider tribal facilities • Adherence to NAGPRA procedures for federal lands HANDOUTS • Agenda • Draft list of issues from Cultural/Historic Resources Working Group Discussions (put together by Dee from input from Jessie and Ardis) • List of Baker River Operations and Maintenance activities that would be of concern from a cultural resources standpoint (put together by Jessie) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 12-9-02 PME MEETING Page 4 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 CulturaI!Historical ResourcesWorking Group Draft List of IssuesDrawn from Group Discussions December2002 Compliance with Laws and Regulations . Compliancewith federalculturalresourcelaws & regulations . Consistencywith ForestServicelaws andregulations . Meet FERC responsibilityregardingtribal consultations Plan Development . DevelopCultural ResourcesManagementPlan (Historic Propertie;g ManagementPlan) . CreatePSPJUSFSagreementon cultural resourcesso tribes know who hasauthority . Developcurationplan . Includerepatriationclausein curationplan . Develophistoric buildings & structuresdistrict . Impactsanduseof future technologies Project Activities . Concernabouteffectsof generalProjectO&M activitieson cultural resources . Developmentof training for BakerRiver Projectpersonnel . Unanticipateddiscoveries Types of Impacts . Concernabouterosionanddeposition(effectsof reservoirdrawdown) . Concernaboutvandalismto cultural sites . Concernsabout damageto archaeologicalsitesfrom off-road vehicles andotherrecreationalactivity . Concernsaboutfuture recreationaldevelopments .- Concernsaboutdisturbanceof burials Resourcesto Protect . Protect, mitigate, and enhancecultural resources . Protectsacredsitesand ceremonialbathingsites . Protectcedar,benies,basketsmakingsitesandmedicinalplantsthat are currentas well astraditional cultural properties CHRWG Draft Issues List December 2002 Page1 ~I~I ~ . Protectmountaingoats . Protectresourcesfrom prehistoric& earlyhistoric (contact)periods . Other sites,artifactsthat may be therethat we don't know aboutyet . Othertribal interestsexpressed:useof downedcedar,firewood, native plants,controlledburning to enhanceberries Relationships . Coordinatewith otherworking groups . Helping other working groupsto unde~tandcultural implications . Be sure that Tribes are heard and develop & maintain open and ongoing communication and relationships . Resolvingconflicts when they comeup Education . Developeducationand interpretationopportunitiesto developpublic respect& appreciationfor culture/historyof area . Telling the history of the valley . Offsite education(e.g.,websites) CHRWG Draft Issues List December 2002 Page2 Cultural/Historical Resources Working Group Outline of Issues Drawn from Group Discussions Draft # 2 December 9, 2002 Compliance with Laws and Regulations—Our work must: 1) Be in compliance with federal cultural resource laws & regulations a) NHPA – National Historic Preservation Act b) ARPA- Archaeological Resources Protection Act c) NEPA – National Environmental Protection Act d) AIRFA – American Indian Religious Freedom Act e) NAGPRA – Native American Graves Protection & Repatriation Act 2) Be consistent with Forest Service laws and regulations (Mt. Baker/Snoqualmie Forest Plan as amended) 3) Meet FERC responsibility regarding tribal consultations Resource Management plan—We need to: 1) Develop a Cultural Resources Management Plan (Historic Properties Management Plan) 2) Create PSE/USFS agreement on cultural resources so tribes know who has authority 3) Develop a curation plan that: a) Complies with NHPA & ARPA b) Adheres to NAGPRA procedures for federal land c) Includes repatriation clause in curation plan d) Considers possible future tribal facilities 4) Consider the impacts and use of future technologies 5) Include monitoring plan 6) Provide for conflict resolution Project Activities—We are concerned about: 1) Effects of general Project O&M activities on cultural resources 2) Development of training for Baker River Project personnel 3) Unanticipated discoveries Types of Impacts—Following are the types of impacts that might require protection and/or mitigation of cultural resources: 1) Effects of reservoirs a) Chemical alterations (saturation, etc.) b) Physical displacement/transportation c) Erosion and deposition (effects of reservoir drawdown) d) Physical alteration (water wear) of artifacts e) Seasonal access to cultural sites f) Changing the defining features or characteristics of historic places and TCPs 2) Vandalism to cultural sites 3) Damage to archaeological sites from off-road vehicles and other recreational activity 4) Impacts of future recreational developments 5) Disturbance of burials 6) Disturbance of TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) CHRWG Draft Issues List—draft # 2—December 9, 2002 Page 1 a) Introduces a range of impacts we cannot capture at this point (awaiting survey results) b) E.G., sites whose values include solitude—recreationists, etc., could disturb c) E.G., changing view shed at a Vision site Resources to Protect Examples of Resources we are concerned about 1) Sacred sites and ceremonial bathing sites 2) Cedar, berries, baskets making sites and medicinal plants that are current as well as traditional cultural properties 3) Wildlife (including mountain goat, elk, deer, bears and others sacred to the tribes) 4) Archeological sites/artifacts from prehistoric & early historic (contact) periods 5) Historic properties 6) Treaty resources (on USFS lands) 7) Other sites, artifacts that may be there that we don’t know about yet Possible Protection, Mitigation and/or Enhancements 1) For Archeological Sites a) Stabilize b) Restrict accessibility (physical, re-route, educate, etc.) c) Data recovery (excavation, detailed descriptions, photo documentation) d) Decide improvement through consultation process e) Keep sites confidential f) Re-design/alter project (to avoid sites) g) Engineer an armoring/protection h) Education/public awareness i) Patrol sites j) Monitor (e.g., video surveillance) k) Scheduled visits/maintain a record l) Develop GIS data base (erosion) m) Curation (long-term, permanent preservation) n) Training (of staff and tribes) 2) For Historic Buildings/Structures (Architecture) a) Many of the strategies listed above b) Move buildings/structures c) Adaptive re-use d) Consider relationship to City of Concrete historic district. 3) For TCPS/Sacred Sites a) Confidentiality b) Privacy c) Enhancing resources (e.g., planting certain plants, prescribed burning, habitat improvements) d) Restricting access/enhancing access e) Maintaining tribal access f) Ongoing consultation with tribes g) Redesign projects (scheduling timing to not impact cultural rites) h) Public awareness/education—e.g., cultural aspects of plants and goats CHRWG Draft Issues List—draft # 2—December 9, 2002 Page 2 i) Financial remuneration to tribes 4) For Trails, Etc. a) Maintain historic trails with significant design characteristics b) Replacing/reconstructing footbridge c) Enhancing species (e.g., re-establishing huckleberry fields) d) Land acquisition for habitat e) Unanticipated discoveries/plan (being done) i) Monitoring ii) Training of staff iii) Protocol iv) Ongoing consultation with tribes 5) Education a) Develop education and interpretation opportunities to develop public respect & appreciation for culture/history of area b) Find ways to tell the history of the valley CHRWG Draft Issues List—draft # 2—December 9, 2002 Page 3 Baker River Project General O&M Activities Road Building. This is relatively uncommonhoweverit doesoccur occasionally(Blue Tarp fish release site, Lake ShannonBoat LaunchExtensionin recentyears). No new roadbuilding plannedin the nearfuture. Road Grading and Maintenance This is a commonpracticearoundthe project. Main roadsaretypically gradedonceor twice a year. Roadsare snowplowed asneededin the winter. Vegetationis kept cut (or sprayed)back and heavily leaningtreesareremovedasneeded. Vegetation Clearing This is generallyperformedon a seasonalbasisin areassuchas KulshanCampground, the two dikes,along the abutmentsof the darns,road edges,inside the compounds,etc. Vegetationclearingis alsoperformedaroundstructuresto limit fire hazardsandmitigate againsttreesfalling and striking buildings. Ditch Clearing This is generallydoneon an annualbasisto preparefor the fall andwinter rains. It may be worth mentioningthe areabehindKulshanCampgroundwherenaturalspoils from jobs suchasditch clearingaredeposited. Snag Clearing This was doneduring the winter of 2000-2001during the extremelow level of Lake Shannon.With the reservoirdrawn down to approximately370' (andthe understanding that it may becomea more commonpracticein future years),it was decidedto cut tree tops down to the waterline,effectively removingan averageof 20' of treeprotrudingout of the water andposing a largehazardto boaters. Thereareno plansto do this againin the nearfuture. New Construction Thereareplansto constructa residentialbuilding within the VB compound,probably at the site of the old doublewide mobile that was demolished. In addition,theremay be somefisheriesracewaysinstalledat the new spawningbeachfor fish rearing. Engineeringwasbudgetedfor 2003 and constructionin 2004. Any Maintenance Involving Heavy Equipment Heavy equipmentis typically usedto maintainthe roads(graders,backhoes,excavators, etc), load on and off the bargeto supportwork on the dam,dozersto level the spoil dwnp site, etc. Vehicle Turnouts and Turnarounds Vehicle turnout and aremaintainedat the sametime and samemannerasthe roadways. No new onesplannedhere. Draft December2002  