BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Solution Team June 26, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Building Mountlake Terrace, WA  Mission: By April 30, 2004, the Baker Solution Team will draft a settlement agreement for relicensing of the Baker River Project that best meets the interests of the signatories.  FINAL MEETING NOTES Note: Call Connie at 425-462-3556 if unable to attend the meeting so she can plan for lunches. Call Lyn at (new cell number) 425-890-3613 if something comes up at the last minute (on the way to the meeting). Team Leader: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy) 425-462-3556, connie.freeland@pse.com Members Present: Steve Hocking and Keith Brooks (FERC – phone), Rod Sakrison (Dept. of Ecology), Jon Vanderheyden (U.S. Forest Service), Steve Flude (Skagit Co. Public Works), Peter Dykstra ( Citizen), Steve Jennison ( Dept. of Natural Resources), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Lauri Vigue (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Bob Helton (Citizen), Bill Reinard (Wildcat Steelhead Club), Bruce Freet (National Park Service), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservative Council), Ed Schild (PSE), Connie Freeland (PSE), Lloyd Pernela (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse (Facilitator with PDSA Consulting) FUTURE MEETING DATES July 24, August 28, September 25, October 23, 2002  NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Comments on ICD/Scoping Document 1 due July 22. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/26/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   • • • • • • •  • • •  • • • • •  ALL: Review FERC mailing list that was included with Scoping Document 1. Send additions/corrections to Steve at FERC. Connie: Attach letters of support for PSE’s request to use the ALP to meeting minutes. Connie: Draft a letter summarizing schedule and send to all members and ask how they want to participate in the process and how we can help. Lyn: Call missing Solution Team members and tell them about the settlement process. Lloyd: Get Bob the Project number of the North Umpqua Settlement Agreement. P-1927 Steve H.: Make sure those who sent letters of support for ALP process are added to FERC mailing list. ALL: Give Lloyd feedback on HYDROPS model study request form ASAP. Lloyd: Put together a Technical Working Group to resolve Model issues (access to and comfort with). Lloyd: Distribute a filled-out example of the HYDROPS model study request form by July 11 for members to review. Lloyd: Touch base with Team Leaders re: issues that need to be resolved and send out an update: • Studies being kicked back and forth between working groups (e.g., recreation and water quality). • Baseline vs. continuing impacts. • Recreation Working Group consultant has not completed analysis of last field season data and is now planning the next field season without knowing gaps from first study. Bill: Email Arn paper on Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Lyn and Stan: Revisit “Elevating Issues to Solution Team” protocol and spell out content for white papers. Rod: Send Lloyd email address for Lara Whitely Binder (UW). Lloyd: Consider glacier melting and Pacific Decadal Oscillation effects on hydrology model. Lloyd: Send Bruce detailed schedules for each resource group, which integrate studies into overall schedule.  AGENDA June 26, 2002 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process – Dee Endelman 3. Review/revise minutes/agenda 4. Cultural/Historical Resources Working Group 5. ALP Status 6. Prepare for/do FERC conference call 7. Debrief HYDROPS workshop 8. Reimbursement Policy 9. Relicensing Schedule 10. Action Items 11. Other Issues? 12. Set agenda for July 24 13. Evaluate meeting SETTLEMENT PROCESS BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/26/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   Dee reviewed with the group the suggested process for drafting a Settlement Agreement as defined at the Settlement Teamlet Meeting on May 28, 2002. She also distributed notes from that meeting. After considerable discussion where some members expressed concern that discussion of PME’s was premature and would detract from time necessary for study plan development, we agreed to initiate this process with the Working Groups, beginning in July. Dee and Lyn will facilitate these sessions. We will review the process with Working Group members and then ask if they would like to take the issues they identified last year and re-frame them into questions or problems to be solved. They can also use the drafts the Team Leaders came up with as a starting point. Issues to address with Working Groups: • Studies take our time • Science? Studies not done – How can we brainstorm solutions? • Criteria for solutions • Why this timeline? FERC CONFERENCE CALL • Update on ALP request – When will FERC make a decision? (Mid-July. Steve asked to have additional letters of support faxed to him at 202-219-0205 as well as filed with FERC.) Connie listed letters of support PSE has received to date: Wildcat Steelhead Club, North Cascades Conservation Council, Robert Helton (Citizen), Skagit County Board of Commissioners, Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group, Upper Skagit Indian Tribe, Department of Natural Resources, Department of Interior (coordinated comments from National Park Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service), and Swinomish Tribal Community. Department of Ecology and U.S. Forest Service will send letters this week. • Competitor? (Not to our knowledge.) • Pitfalls? (Stick to deadlines. Start writing settlement agreement) • Service/Mail lists are lacking. (Electronic mailing instructions on FERC website. It is never too late to be added to the FERC mailing list. FERC will send out revised mailing list with Scoping Document 2 after July 22.) • FERC representatives – interactions? (Commission support staff were assigned when docket # was issued. The following contact persons have recently been assigned and may be changed over time due to limited resource availability. Current FERC staff assigned to help up through the ALP: Steve Hocking (D.C.) Principal Contact and Terrestrial, Frank Winchell (D.C) Cultural/Historical, Chuck Hall (D.C.) Engineer and Economist, John Blair (D.C.) Recreation and Land Use, and Michael Henry (Portland OR) Fish.) CULTURAL/HISTORICAL RESOURCES WORKING GROUP This group has begun meeting again. They are in the process of engaging a new consultant to finish the archaeological work. There were representatives of the Upper Skagit and Swinomish Tribes at the meeting. They are figuring out how to address confidentiality issues. Team Leader Jessie Piper will be touching base with FERC support contact Frank Winchell regarding the team’s progress. HYDROPS MODEL WORKSHOP The HYDROPS workshop was held on June 12. “Theory” behind the model was emphasized in the morning and there were exercises in the afternoon that gave folks a chance to play with a two-reservoir BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/26/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   model and review HYDROPS input screens and outputs. There were 22 attendees. Next: hold some small resource-specific seminars to give people a chance to become more familiar with the model. Powell is in the process of creating and finalizing output format. Next steps include defining a base case against which various inputs would be compared. The issues of accessibility and verification of the model were raised. Currently, Stetson (consultant to USFS) is looking at how to correlate data from this model with habitat issues. We need to continue to work these issues off-line. We hope to put all these issues to rest at our next meeting. Lloyd distributed a review of the model and a draft of the Study Request form the Working Groups would use to request various scenarios to be run through the model. He would appreciate feedback on this form. For the next meeting, he will bring a completed version of the form to give folks a better idea of how it would be filled out. REIMBURSEMENT POLICY Lloyd distributed a new PSE policy of travel expense reimbursement for participants in the relicensing process for travel and lodging. Eligibility for reimbursement will not be extended to federal/state agencies with conditioning authority. RELICENSING SCHEDULE AND STUDIES REPORTING Lloyd distributed a sample of the new format that we will be using to track request and studies progress. PSE has attempted to incorporate suggestions from Solution Team members for making these forms more meaningful. He also distributed an updated version of the project schedule along with a description of how to interpret schedule symbols. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Connie: Began sketching out relationship of relicensing schedule to Solution Team agendas. • Lloyd: Prepared a guide to reading the Baker Relicensing Schedule. • Ed/Jon: Still discussing a common approach re: continuing impacts. • Lyn: Contacted Trout Unlimited. Rick Abbott will begin representing TU and is discussing possibly representing American Rivers. PARKING LOT • Members need to describe their roles in terms of decision-making authority in their organizations (this relates to who would be members of the Policy Solution Team). • Define a process for delayed resolution (based on incomplete studies). • Adaptive management: • How can we take into account future technology, knowledge, conditions, resources, weather (global warming), etc.? • How can we balance licensee exposure? • How to enlist recreational users. • Define “project induced.” (Teamlet?) • FERC boundary. • Develop public information protocol. • Summary of Record of Decisions. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/26/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   HANDOUTS • Notes from Baker Solution Team Settlement Teamlet Meeting, May 28, 2002 • Email from Dee Endelman to Baker Team Leaders re Framing the Issues for Collaborative Problem Solving (June 13, 2002) • Baker River System – routing schematic for HYDROPS model • Study Request Form for Baker River HYDROPS model • Travel Expense Reimbursement – new PSE policy • Study Request Index – sample page with update box and date of update • Baker Relicense Schedule (June 25, 2002) and Your Trail Map to the Baker Relicense Schedule TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING July 24, 2002 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. – 3 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update 3. Preparation for FERC call 4. Do FERC call • Scoping Document 1 comments • Other issues? 5. Action Items/ Review Minutes/Agenda • Issues for Solution Team to address • Studies and schedule review 6. Update on HYDROPS model 7. ICD Comments? 8. Discuss list of EA (Environmental Assessment) contractors 9. Set next agenda 10. Evaluate meeting MEETING EVALUATION Well Dones • Got out early • Nice to have Lauri here • Good food • Time lines and products being defined Need to Improve • Fruit and sandwiches next time • Diet pop • Get broader participation  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 6/26/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution Team FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   24 June 2002 Travel Expense Reimbursement In an effort to promote greater participation in the collaborative relicensing process by all interested parties, PSE will consider reimbursing certain direct expenses related to meeting attendance for the Baker River Hydroelectric Project that are actually incurred by participants1 who are not otherwise able to meaningfully participate in meetings. A participant seeking reimbursement may submit a request for reimbursement as outlined below. PSE will reimburse for mileage at the established I.R.S. rate for travelling to and from meetings, subject to PSE's sole and absolute discretion. PSE may reimburse reasonable costs for overnight lodgings if required due to distance traveled to attend meetings when appropriate, or for other unusual expenses relating to meeting attendance, in PSE's sole and absolute discretion. A participant may request confirmation that specific categories or types of expenditures to be submitted for reimbursement for meeting attendance by a designated representative will likely be paid by PSE ("Pre-approval"). Requests for reimbursement must be submitted on forms provided by PSE, with evidence of actual expenditures incurred as indicated on said forms. PSE will reimburse on a certain day of each month, as established by PSE. Requests for reimbursement for more than one meeting can be combined. PSE will not honor reimbursement requests made more than ninety (90) days after a meeting is attended. PSE reserves the right to reject any request for reimbursement; however, PSE will make a good faith effort to honor each request that is within the described scope of a Preapproval. PSE reserves the right to cease reimbursement for meeting participation at any time at its discretion.  1  Eligibility for reimbursement is not intended to extend to federal agencies that have authority to issue mandatory conditions under 4(e) of the Federal Power Act, to state agencies that have authority to make determinations under the Clean Water Act or Coastal Zone Management Act, or to state agencies that may recommend conditions under 10(a) or 10(j) of the Federal Power Act, nor is it intended to extend to FERC representatives.   Baker River Project Relicensing Expense Report  Name  Organization  Phone  ( Address  Date  Working Group  )  State  Zip  Mileage Rate: $0.36  Lodging  Other  No  Amount  Amount  City  Amount  Email  Describe nature of business purpose of each expenditure. Receipts are required.  Total I certify the information on this report to be a true and accurate account of expenses incurred in the conduct of business activities reported in accordance with company expense reporting policies. Signature (Sign full name)  Updated 1/10/03  Team Leader Approval (Sign full name)  Total   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSING STUDY REQUEST The purpose of this form is to provide a uniform template for any working group member to request a study and to provide the working group(s) with information from which to evaluate and prioritize study requests. In-depth proposals will be developed after the working group(s) approve the study concept. This form is intended only to assist the working group(s) in the selection of studies, and is not intended to inhibit the working group(s) from pursuing other options that ultimately lead to a settlement agreement. The methods for approving and funding studies are described in the Baker Relicensing Process Document. The steps involved in development of a study are: 1. Proponent completes the study request form and submits it to the working group. 2. The working group(s) or the Solution Team approves the study. 3. The technical working group(s) and/or consultant develops the study design. 4. Review and approval of the study design is conducted by the working group(s). 5. Final approval and funding will be decided based on methods described in the Process Document.  BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSING STUDY REQUEST Name and Affiliation  Working Group  Date  Study Title  Brief Description  Purpose  Related Interests and Issues (bulleted list) •  STEP ONE - Linkage to Relicensing. Briefly answer the following questions. All proposals must address at least one of the next four questions for further consideration. A. Does the study eliminate a critical uncertainty that is essential to address a range of alternatives and/or Project impacts? Briefly describe the uncertainty.  B. What information does the study provide that is needed to support protection, mitigation, and enhancement discussions?  C. How will the results of the study help us to develop, evaluate or choose between proposed strategies and/or alternatives?  studyrequestform.doc  1 of 3   D. What information does the study provide that addresses one or more statutory requirements (e.g., Endangered Species Act (ESA), Clean Water Act (CWA), Northwest Forest Plan (NWFP), Federal Power Act (FPA))?  STEP TWO – Study Context. Your response to these questions will be used by the working group(s) when setting study priorities. Please provide brief answers. A. Does the study provide information that will allow the working group to achieve multipurpose goals that may be considered during the relicensing process (e.g., recreation and wildlife)? Describe how the information would achieve these goals. Is the study related to other studies in the basin?  B. What existing data are relevant? Why aren’t these data sufficient?  C. Are there established methods for this study? Cite references.  D. When are the study results needed? Will the results be available when needed in the relicensing process?  STEP THREE – Study Description. This description is not the design, rather information that can be used to complete a draft of a detailed design. This section may be completed prior to or after preliminary evaluation by the working group, but must be completed prior to final approval for study design. If necessary, the working group can designate a technical working group and/or request a consultant to assist with the completion of step 3. A. What questions will the study answer (specific objectives, hypotheses being tested or parameters being estimated)? (bulleted list) • B. What information needs to be obtained to meet the objectives or test the hypotheses? (bulleted list) • C. Will there be a statistical analysis in this study? If yes, what method and to what level of reliability? If no, why?  D. What are the assumptions of the study? (bulleted list) • E. Proposed study schedule. Estimated timeframe of study before results are available to make management decisions?  F. Preliminary cost estimate or range, if available.  studyrequestform.doc  2 of 3   G. Briefly describe the study methods and provide background literature, if available.  H. How will the results be used to develop or implement protection, mitigation and enhancement measures?  studyrequestform.doc  3 of 3    2002solution20020626.pdf en 