BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Solution Team July 24, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Building Mountlake Terrace, WA  Mission: By April 30, 2004, the Baker Solution Team will draft a settlement agreement for relicensing of the Baker River Project that best meets the interests of the signatories.  FINAL MEETING NOTES Note: Call Connie at 425-462-3556 if unable to attend the meeting so she can plan for lunches. Call Lyn cell phone 425-890-3613 if something comes up at the last minute (on the way to the meeting). Team Leader: Connie Freeland (Puget Sound Energy) 425-462-3556, connie.freeland@pse.com Members Present: Lloyd Pernela and Joel Molander (PSE), Gene Stagner (USFW), Steve Hocking and Keith Brooks (FERC – phone), Jon Vanderheyden (U.S. Forest Service), Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group), Gary Sprague (WA Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Bob Helton (Citizen), Steve Fransen (National Marine Fisheries Services), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation), Stan Walsh (Skagit System Cooperative), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservative Council), Ann Marie Gutwein (Skagit County Public Works), Jerry Louthain, (Economic and Engineering Services Anacortes and Skagit P.U.D. and Town of Concrete), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse PDSA (Facilitator). FUTURE MEETING DATES August 28, September 25, October 30, 2002 Because of Thanksgiving, consider either November 20th or December 4th for November Meeting. PROCESS FOR EDITING MINUTES We reviewed the language in the Communications Protocol for participant(s) to submit comments on draft minutes. It was observed that, in general, this process seems to be working well. In the future, we will italicize changes to draft minutes for ease in tracking changes. Substantive changes will be attached BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   to the “final” minutes. Editorial comments/later thoughts will be appended to the final minutes. Lyn at the meeting will bolster her efforts to check with members and gain consensus on how the notes should read, especially after a heated discussion. NEW ACTION ITEMS • Steve: Send a draft letter of clarification re: Section VII of the Process Document by August 2. • ALL: Review the draft of Steve’s letter of clarification and send Lloyd comments for distribution (by August 9). • ALL: Review the articles of the existing license. • ALL: Call or e-mail Lloyd with feedback on contractors by August 7th. See FERC’s list of approved EIS contractors. • Lloyd: Send out all comments received by PSE on the Initial Consultation Document, that were not passed out today to members. • Lloyd: Send out all comments received by FERC on Scoping Document 1, that were not passed out today to members. • Lloyd: Send Jerry white papers on HYDROPS Model. • Joel/Lloyd: Distribute Model request form, summary outputs, and a list of data the model handles to Economics Working Group members. • Lyn/Lloyd revise/send out newly revised Process for Elevating Issues to the Solution Team. AGENDA July 24, 2002 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Discussion of minutes 3. Settlement Process Update 4. Preparation for FERC call 5. Do FERC call • Review FERC July 19, 2002 approval of ALP request • Scoping Document 1 comments, closing 7/22/02 • Latest Communications Protocol/Process Document 6. Action Items • Elevation Process • Studies and schedule review • Reimbursement Policy and form • ICD Comments, closing 7/22/02 • Consultant to do Preliminary Draft Environmental Assessment • HYDROPS model accessibility • HYDROPS model verification/ testing 7. Update on HYDROPS model 8. Set next agenda 9. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   SETTLEMENT PROCESS UPDATE Dee reviewed with us how the Working Groups responded to our request to work toward creating an initial draft of potential PME options. In the three Working Groups, members expressed concern about the lack of sufficient time available to come up with this list, and all agreed to move forward under Dee’s guidance. She distributed an outline showing how she presented the process to come up with: • areas we know we want to address, • areas where we have insufficient information to even guess at a PME, and • areas where there is diversity (re: how we might address a particular issue). We noted this would by no means be an exhaustive or prioritized list. Dee also passed out an initial draft of a matrix the resource area teamlets will use to begin drafting PME options. She will integrate the following changes to the matrix: • Indication of related studies (ongoing/needed) • Timelines for those studies (to identify critical uncertainties for the Solution Team to address). Dee recommended that the Working Groups have their list of options for PMEs for Solution Team review at the October 30 Solution Team Meeting. Each Working Group needs the month of October to complete the task. Another issue raised by the Working Groups is how potential options for PMEs would be shared across the various resource areas Working Groups. Dee and Lyn will assure the work products from each Working Group are shared with the others. We reviewed and revised the draft criteria for narrowing options for PMEs. They are: REQUIRED: • Is it legal? • Addresses a Project impact. CONSIDERATIONS: • What interests are: 1) Met by PME 2) Not Met/In Conflict with PME • What might be unintended consequences? A. Within Resource Area B. With Other Resource Areas FERC CONFERENCE CALL • ALP – FERC’s July 19th Approval of Baker Project Request to use ALP. Struck Section VII of Communications Protocol’s/Process Document. FERC explained that the intent of striking Section VII of the Process Document was to remove only that language that related to the deferral of studies. In actuality, the entire section was removed. Many expressed a desire to withdraw their support for going forward with the ALP if the entire section was removed. After discussion, it was clarified that FERC’s desire to minimize things that might lead to delays was the driver here. Everyone except PSE said they would continue their support for the ALP without the study deferral-related language. Lloyd said he would have to review this “back at the ranch.” This Section VII was designed to reach agreement on PME in lieu of study; the BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   section covered the event final settlement was not reached. FERC has a process for handling additional studies (beyond the application deadline) if good cause can be shown. Steve and Keith agreed to send out a letter of clarification stating that only the study-deferral piece of Section VII be removed from the Process Document. This will save us from having to file a request for clarification with the Commission. In the initial paragraph under Section VII: we removed “and propose for Commission approval.” Previously, FERC would approve study schedules and deadlines. Steve will reflect this change in his letter. •  Scoping Document 1 Comments Closing date was July 22. Received comments from NPS, Town of Concrete, Skagit County, WDFW, WDNR, and others. Steve will address comments received on Scoping Document 1 in a draft of Scoping Document 2 for the Solution Team to review.  •  Scoping Document 2 We raised the question as to whether we need to hold a public hearing and have a 60-day comment period as is cited in Section VI A of the Process Document. FERC doesn’t require either. We agreed not to hold the public meeting as listed in the last paragraph of that section. Steve will reiterate in his letter that FERC doesn’t require the meeting.  •  List of 3rd Party Consultants for Environmental Assessment Can we add to this list? What is the time frame? Steve reported that FERC reviews this list periodically. He wasn’t sure how someone might be added to the list. We routed a copy of the FERC-website guidelines for getting on the approved list.  •  Resource Agency Comprehensive Plans Steve encouraged agencies with comprehensive plans pertinent to the Baker Project to submit an original and eight copies to FERC for inclusion on their master list. FERC recognizes plans on the master list.  PROCESS FOR ELEVATING ISSUES TO THE SOLUTION TEAM We reviewed and revised the draft outline of what the white papers would include: • Subject • Tie to relicensing • Summary of viewpoint • Who is for/against/neutral • How viewpoint meets the interests of team members • Required time frame for resolution by the Solution Team Other changes: • We replaced the word “position” with “viewpoint.” • We removed the word “opposing” from the first sentence after the asterisk. • We clarified the no more than 2-page rule with “not exceeding 4 double spaced pages”. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   •  We removed “two” since there may be more than two viewpoints that the Working Group is unable to resolve.  Lyn will send the revised elevation process to Lloyd to distribute. REIMBURSEMENT POLICY Lloyd distributed PSE’s travel reimbursement form with the policy on the back. Participants (other than Federal and State agencies with conditioning authorities) may begin submitting for reimbursement of travel from January 1, 2002. ICD COMMENTS Lloyd distributed comments received by PSE on the ICD for our review. [To date: NPS, Skagit County, Federation of Fly Fishers, and Bill McMillan, personal comments.] PDEA CONTRACTOR Lloyd distributed FERC’s approved EIS contractor list for our review. All were encouraged to give Lloyd feedback by August 7th. PSE is conducting an informal background check on these contractors. PSE will ask a short-list of contractors for a Statement of Qualifications vs. RFP. A key criterion includes those who are familiar with NW ecosystems. We are also looking for contractors with a local presence. The week of August 4, PSE will solicit input /SOQ from contractors acceptable to the Solution Team. Contractors will be asked to respond with the list of actual folks who will be doing the work, a copy of previous work, experience in the Northwest, documentation of recent experience in EA/ EIS preparation, and a list of client references. The following is a list of Contractors known to be local: • EDAW, Inc. • Parametrix, Inc. • Normandeau Associates, Inc. • Dames and Moore --- URS • Louis Berger and Associates, Inc. • Environmental Resources Management (ERM) • Harza Engineering Co. • Jones and Stokes Associates, Inc. • HDR Engineering, Inc. • CH2M Hill Inc. • Acres International Corp. HYDROPS MODEL Joel discussed: • Technical review PSE is seeking an independent third party to verify and validate HYDROPS water flow, energy validation, etc. They are considering using Stetson Engineering to perform that function. Stetson is under contract to the USFS. PSE is having Mark Kilgore of Louis Berger conduct a confidence review of the model. It was suggested that the Corps participate in this review. Their flood reservoir-rule BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   curve will drive how PSE can operate during flood season. PSE has invited and will continue to invite the Corps to participate in this process. •  Accessibility PSE is researching the ability to give folks remote access to the model. They are reviewing four proposals, including PC-Anywhere. They will let us know when an approach has been selected. Some “playful” runs may evolve into formal run requests (i.e., scenarios).  •  Request Form Joel distributed a completed draft of a study request form with a recreation request example. Working Groups would use the form to request scenarios to be formally run. As we begin using the model, we will revise these forms to better meet our needs.  •  Summary Reports Joel presented a draft summary scenario report [parameters included: releases, stages, reservoir elevations, spills, cavitation hours.] As we begin using the model, we will revise these summary reports to better meet our needs. Comments should go to Joel.  RELICENSING SCHEDULE AND STUDIES REPORTING Lloyd distributed the latest study tracking reports [requests and ongoing studies] for our review. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS Connie: Attached letters of support for PSE’s request to use the ALP to meeting minutes. Connie: Drafted a letter summarizing schedule and sent to all resource members’ agency heads and asked how they want to participate in the process and how we can help. Lyn: Called missing Solution Team members and told them about the settlement process. Lloyd: Got Bob the Project number of the North Umpqua Settlement Agreement. P-1927 Steve H: Make sure those who sent letters of support for ALP process are added to FERC mailing list. ALL: Gave Lloyd feedback on HYDROPS model study request form ASAP. Lloyd: Put together a Technical Working Group to resolve Model issues (access to and comfort with). Lloyd: Distributed a filled-out example of the HYDROPS model study-request form by July 11 for members to review. Lloyd: Touched base with Team Leaders re: issues that need to be resolved and sent out an update: Studies being kicked back and forth between working groups: 1. Recreation and Aquatics on dispersed campsites and water quality (needs request rewrite). 2. Recreation and Terrestrial on project impacts on goats (controversial; possible elevation to Solution Team or a PME). 3. Aquatics and Recreation on trout in Baker Lake (group expressed this is not an issue).  We agreed that it is up to the initiator (e.g., agency proposing the study request) to champion the request effort and if necessary across working groups and/or elevating it to the Solution Team. Baseline vs. continuing impacts: According to FERC, “baseline” is April 30, 2006. We have agreed to this and to consider reference studies requests. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6   Recreation Working Group “consultant has not completed analysis of last field season data and is now planning the next field season without knowing gaps from first study.” First stage summary of 2001 data was distributed in February. A teamlet in March 2002 evaluated 2001 results and concluded coverage was sufficient for intended purposes and did not request 2002 or 2003 surveys. At the July meeting, most of second stage results were reviewed and contemplate second stage summary in August. Bill: Emailed Arn paper on Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Rod: Send Lloyd email address for Lara Whitely Binder (UW). Lloyd: Considered glacier melting and Pacific Decadal Oscillation effects on hydrology model. Lloyd: Sent Bruce Freet detailed schedules for each resource group. Lyn and Stan: Revisited “Elevating Issues to Solution Team” protocol and spelled out content for white papers. WHAT’S HOT IN THE WORKING GROUPS Recreation: • Lots of information to digest • Anxiety re: aggressive schedule • Expectation that we can make decisions without all information Terrestrial: • Cross communication among working groups through website—put study plans, reports on website? • Fear that Solution Team members think we’re “slacking”—we’re not; we’re working hard together, just have tough issues Aquatics: • Settlement Issues • Limnology Study 2003 BUDGET PSE is entering their budget cycle for 2003. All should be considering 2003 study/ information needs and discuss with Team Leaders ASAP. PARKING LOT • Members need to describe their roles in terms of decision-making authority in their organizations (this relates to who would be members of the Policy Solution Team). • Define a process for delayed resolution (based on incomplete studies). • Adaptive management: • How can we take into account future technology, knowledge, conditions, resources, weather (global warming), etc.? • How can we balance licensee exposure? • How to enlist recreational users. • Define “project induced.” (Teamlet?) • FERC boundary. • Develop public information protocol. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 7   •  Summary of Record of Decisions.  HANDOUTS • FERC’s ruling on the ALP Request • The draft of the Communications Protocol and the Process Document submitted with ALP request. • Baker River HYDROPS Model – Study Request Form • ICD Comments to PSE • Scoping Document 1 Comments to FERC • Studies Tracking Updates • Travel Expense Reimbursement forms • FERC Third Party Contractors • Settlement Process Handouts • New draft of Process to Elevate Issues to the Solution Team TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING August 28, 2002 at USFS Office Building in Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. 1. Introductions 2. Settlement Process Update 3. Action Items 4. Prep for FERC Conference call 5. FERC Call: Review Steve’s clarification letter and late SDI comments 6. NEPA Consultant Report 7. HYDROPS Status (accessibility and testing) 8. Schedule – critical path 9. What’s hot in Working Groups? 10. Skagit “Wild Life” Report 11. Other? 12. Evaluate Meeting 13. Set agenda for September 25 meeting MEETING EVALUATION Well Dones • Gene’s, Steve’s, Ann Marie’s participation • Got out early • Joel’s discussion of model • Like Greek food • FERC’s flexibility in process • What’s Hot list • Cake! Need to Improve • Coffee ran out at 11:19 • Add veggie option to food BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 8   • • •  Weight of paper: print double-sided Post Solution Team agenda on website (currently with previous meeting notes) Post “final” study plans on website  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 7/24/2002 MEETING NOTES Baker Solution TeamFERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 9    2002solution20020724.pdf en 