 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group September 23, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Tony Fuchs, Joel Molander, Lloyd Pernela (PSE), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Mark Kilgore (Louis Berger Group), Joyce Liu (Powell). SCHEDULE: All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30. Next meetings will be October 7 (interim meeting for PMEs) at USFS office in Mountlake Terrace, October 28 at USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace, November 18 (at?), and December 17(at?). September 23, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office/Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Baker River Project Relicense September 22, 2002 Page 1 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. HYDROPS model demo 4. Review/discuss draft PM&E measures 5. R16 Visioning Exercise teamlet report/next steps 6. Studies Update 7. Set agenda and location for October 28 meeting 8. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • Chris: Send out Visioning Exercise invitation, and identify RSVP person. • All: Send any names of additional people (and addresses) to add to mailing list to Chris ASAP. • Chris: Notify working group members of the October 7th PME working group meeting. • All: Review Working Group Operating Norms to see if/how they should be revised. We will discuss at our October 28th meeting. • Lyn: Lyn will check in October with Howards re: their participation in our meetings. • Tony: Send out updated ownership maps before next meeting. • Dee: Update PME matrix and send out for our review after October 7th meeting. • Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). We have already collected everything that we need to satisfy FERC requirements. • Andy: Take pictures and get digital (GPS) locations of each viewpoint, from Ann’s locations. • Chris: Map what we need to do as a working group in terms of the broader relicensing schedule. • Chris: Call IP Forestry (Gordy Iverson) about adding them to Recreation WG list. • Andy/Tony: Have Andy bring boat ramp elevations and photos/info to next meeting (CD?). REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • All: Visioning exercise conference call happened. • All: Reviewed updated matrix and gave Dee feedback by September 3rd. • All: Considered ideas for recreation-based scenarios to run through HYDROPS model. Six items were identified from the May working group meeting that we would like to model. • All: Working group norms will be reviewed at the October 28th meeting. • Chris: Buttoned up with Lloyd re: IP Forestry attending our meetings. • Tony: Brought updated draft Whatcom County ownership map to meeting, Skagit County draft map to be completed within a week. • Dee: Updated PME matrix and sent it to working group members. • Lyn: Lyn will check in October with Howards re: their participation in our meetings. • Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). • Ann: Sent Andy photo locations for viewpoints for aesthetics. • Ann: Brought map of viewpoints to meeting. • Chris: Sent out results of R13 visitor survey to those who indicated they wanted it. HYDROPS MODEL PRESENTATION Joel gave us an overview of current status of the HYDROPS model development process, including how Baker River Project Relicense September 22, 2002 Page 2 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group we will be able to request studies and access the model. They are still working on the output portions of the model. He said that the model will be available in the future via remote access and also in the PSE Bellevue office. Joyce gave a review of how the model works, both from the perspective of inputs and outputs. Joyce ran base cases for wet and dry years to demonstrate model output. Joel discussed adding capability to better serve data needs of the recreation working group. We asked numerous questions about the model’s capabilities, including need to compare reservoir elevations (different types of water years and levels), how climate change will be taken into account, and how to incorporate minimum boat ramp elevations. Joel said this would be done by changing “soft minimum constraints.” Joel asked that group members give input on standard reporting requirements to him. Procedures for using model will be developed by Econ/Ops group. More will come to working groups after Stetson Engineering (USFS contractor) has completed their review within the next 3-4 weeks. The hope is that the USFS and other agencies will be comfortable using HYDROPS after 3rd party review. Econ/Ops group will, by mid October, develop standard procedure for study requests. PME DISCUSSION Dee reviewed ground rules for discussing PME’s. She showed us the assumptions that the Aquatics working group adopted from their PME review. We decided to adopt the assumptions that legal requirements would be met, and flood control would be included. We reviewed most of the options for Issue #1 and scheduled an interim working group meeting on October 7th to complete the PME review. Chris will e-mail all members about the upcoming meeting. VISIONING EXERCISE We agreed to hold the exercise at the Cottontree Inn on November 6th, from 9am until 1:30pm. Tony will check the availability of the Cottontree (for 40 to 50 people). We adopted the invitation letter drafted by Ann, with edits made by Chris. We proposed to incorporate a reference to the Recreation Working Group, and add meeting location and project area maps to the mailing. We reviewed the mailing list by exception. Susan added some names and suggested follow up phone calls to local government folks. Anyone who comes up with additional names needs to provide the names and addresses to Chris. Chris and Tony will review the list with Connie Freeland. PSE will send out invitations by 9/30. STUDIES UPDATE Chris distributed a handout giving the current status of all studies, with tentative deliverable dates. He also handed out the High Country Recreation Use analysis from the visitor survey information. Chris will be sending out a draft (1st of 6 sections) of the Needs Analysis by the end of October. HANDOUTS • Studies Update 9/23/02 (see attached) • High-Country Recreation Use By Baker Lake Overnight Visitors 9/18/02 PARKING LOT - Visioning exercise - Organizational/agency goals - Bounce around with meeting locations Baker River Project Relicense September 22, 2002 Page 3 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group - Operationally define “vicinity”, “watershed”, “project induced”, “dispersed”, or “displaced” - List authorities that this team must be aware of - Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole - Look into getting guest speaker from Seattle City Light - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) - Land management - SCORP data from Jim - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Need good maps of the project area - Consult with Jim Johnston (with WDFW) - Trailhead surveys - Have demonstration of Charles Howard Model EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • HYDROPS demo • Bismarcks! • Ann’s visioning materials • Dee hung in there with us! Need for Improvement • More people (low attendance) What’s Hot? • Visioning Exercise • PMEs still general TENTATIVE AGENDA October 28, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office - Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Aesthetics study update (photo survey) 4. Boat Ramp Elevation Discussion 5. Review of group norms 6. Report on High Country Use 7. PME Discussion 8. Visioning Update 9. Studies Update 10. Set agenda and location for November 19 meeting 11. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense September 22, 2002 Page 4 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  