BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group October 28, 2002 9:00 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Aesthetics study discussion (photo survey) 4. Boat ramp elevation/photo discussion 5. Review group norms 6. Discuss high-country use analysis 7. Review/discuss draft PM&E measures 8. R16 Visioning Exercise update 9. Studies update 10. Set agenda and location for November 19 meeting 11. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group October 28, 2002 9:00 a.m. <ad> 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: "To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement." Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 8538341. PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Sheryl Lydon (WA DNR), Joan Nichol (Meridian Environmental, Inc. for the Louis Berger Group who will be developing the PDEA), Saul Weinberg (North Cascades Institute), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation), Cary Feldmann and Andy Hatfield (PSE), Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements) and Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Bullock, note taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.). SCHEDULE November 4: Teamlet exercise to work on trail routing at the PSE Business Office in Mt. Vernon, 10:00 <ad> 2:00pm. November 6: Visioning Exercise at the Cotton Tree Inn, 9:00 <ad> 1:30 p.m. November 12, 11:00 <ad> 2:00 p.m. PME meeting at Mountlake Terrace. Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 1 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   November 18 at PSE Office in Mount Vernon. December 16th at the USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace. All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed first-time participant Joan Nichol. Joan is with Meridian Environmental, representing Louis-Berger who will be doing the PDEA. October 28, 2002 Agenda <ad> USFS Office/Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Aesthetics study update (photo survey) 4. Boat Ramp Elevation Discussion 5. Review of group norms 6. Report on High Country Use 7. PME Discussion 8. R16 Visioning Update 9. Studies Update 10. Set agenda and location for December 18 meeting 11. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS <b7> ALL: Let Dee know if you have any changes to the PME matrix by noon on Tuesday, October 29. <b7> Andy: Send out an updated contact list of Working Group members. <b7> Andy: Touch base with Tony/ Lauri re: wildlife connection. <b7> Lyn: Check with the Howards re: their participation in our meetings. <b7> Tony/Andy: Send out updated ownership maps before next meeting. This is still in process of being revised. <b7> Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). We have already collected everything that we need to satisfy FERC requirements. <b7> Andy: Give Joetta (R2) GPS data so she can plot viewpoints and map them to photos <b7> Andy: Contact interested parties who are not regular attendees of this meeting to describe where we are in the process and how to include them. <b7> Ann: Send Chris NVUM data <b7> Ann: Let Don Gay know that we decided not to do trailhead surveys because the cost-benefit analysis was not persuasive <b7> Lyn: Let Lauri Vigue know that we decided not to do trail head surveys because the cost-benefit analysis was not persuasive <b7> Lyn: Update Norms <b7> Sheryl: Contact Steve Jennison re: his attending the Visioning Exercise on November 6th. <b7> Ann: Check availability of Forest Service Sedro-Woolley Office for teamlet meeting on November 4th Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 2 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS <b7> Chris: Sent out Visioning Exercise invitation, and identified RSVP person. <b7> All: Sent any names of additional people (and addresses) to add to mailing list to Chris ASAP. <b7> Chris: Notified working group members of the October 7th PME working group meeting. <b7> All: Reviewed Working Group Operating Norms to see if/how they should be revised. We will discuss at our October 28th meeting. <b7> Dee: Updated PME matrix and gave to Andy who sent it out for our review after October 7th meeting. <b7> Andy: Took pictures and got digital (GPS) locations of each viewpoint, from Ann's locations. <b7> Chris: Mapped what we need to do as a working group in terms of the broader relicensing schedule. <b7> Chris: Talked with PSE about keeping IP Forestry (Gordy Iverson) informed about what is happening in this Working Group off line. <b7> Andy: Brought boat ramp elevations and photos/info to next meeting. REVIEW/DISCUSS DRAFT PME MEASURES Dee distributed an updated version of the Terrestrial matrix for potential PMEs. All are encouraged to review the list and let Dee know by noon on Tuesday (Oct. 29) if they have any concerns or want to suggest additional changes to the matrix. She walked us through a summary she had written up to share with the Solution Team. We edited the summary. Bruce shared with us a high-level view of the schedule relating to PMEs. He discussed putting first draft of PMEs together starting in November. There would be workshops in February 2003 to discuss how to resolve issues across resource areas to put together the second draft (management plans). Second draft PME's would be put together in March 2003, if possible. The PDEA process is starting now (PSE had hired Louis-Berger to perform this function and Joan Nichol will be attending our meetings fairly regularly). FERC will probably request Preliminary Terms, Conditions, and Recommendations in October 03 and the Final Terms, Conditions, and Recommendations due in June 04. Sections and articles for the Settlement Agreement will be turned in with the License application by April 04. R5 AESTHETICS STUDY UPDATE (photo survey) Andy photographed the viewpoints that Ann sent to him. We reviewed the map that included views for Lake Shannon and Baker Lake. There are two types of viewpoints: from Lake out and from out in toward the Lake. The USFS is concerned with implementing its Scenery Management System (SMS). We need to expand the original study request to meet FERC requirements. Chris will look at moving Ann's original request to a Study Plan and rewrite it, where necessary, to include what is required by FERC. We will discuss this at our November 18 meeting. Andy will work on getting the viewpoints and the corresponding photos put onto a CD for our review. BOAT RAMP ELEVATION DISCUSSION Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 3 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   Andy photographed all six public motor boat ramps at the Project and made his best guess at the lowest elevation at which a 16-foot boat could effectively be launched. We should also consider access for hand/sail -powered craft (e.g. courtesy float or docks, etc.). We were reminded that the County has jurisdiction over the use of surface waters. The Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation feels that there must be a compelling reason for the current legal use to be changed. This was in response to the suggestion that the group may wish to consider non-motorized boating only at Lake Shannon in the future. They prefer a recreation plan that addresses activities that are un-served or under-served and that we start with these areas first before looking at enhancing activities that are already reasonably well served. Andy distributed a handout with associated historical information regarding reservoir levels (for both Lake Baker and Lake Shannon) from 1974-2000. Chris provided a supplemental handout, based on the same historical data, that included graphs showing the 90% and 50% exceedance levels for both reservoirs and the estimated minimum operating levels for the respective boat ramps. We haven't yet collected data on the effects of fluctuation in water levels on ramps that occur during a short period of time. Jim mentioned that there are many options available to us to deal with ramping rates. The State's Organization for Boating Access (SOBA) and the Oregon State Marine Board (OSMB) are both good references for us. REVIEW OF GROUP NORMS Lyn distributed copies of the Recreation Resources Working Group Meeting Norms. We reviewed the norms we drafted in December 2002. We altered the meeting times to reflect our current schedule. We noted that we haven't been holding any evening meetings and that many potentially interested parties are unable to attend because they have day jobs that prevent them from being here. We agreed that we would find a way to involve these folks in the near future. Andy will be calling them to discuss options. REPORT ON HIGH COUNTRY USE Chris distributed additional copies of a document and a spreadsheet describing the proportion of folks who camp at Baker Lake and also use high country trails. This handout was originally distributed as a handout at the September 23, 2002 meeting. It included estimates of high country trail use as per the Forest Service's Watershed Analysis. The information seems to be reasonable. There seems to be consensus that this could be a useful tool for negotiations between PSE and the USFS in terms of setting up some kind of an annual payment for maintenance and operation of facilities in question. We came to consensus not to do a trailhead survey because it appears that the cost-benefit ratio would not be persuasive. Note: Chris is continuing to work on fine tuning the information we have around dispersed site occupancy and visitor numbers. R16 VISIONING EXERCISE Andy reported that, to date, thirteen have responded to the invitation to attend the Visioning Exercise on November 6. Ann reported that a conference call has been set up with the facilitators and Tony Fuchs to prepare for that meeting. Chris will give a presentation at the beginning of the exercise covering: existing resources, studies, and existing recreation use patterns. After 1:30, team members will debrief results. Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 4 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   STUDIES UPDATE Highlights from the following studies were summarized and distributed in a handout by Chris: <b7> R9: Electronic Monitoring <b7> R12: Site Inventory <b7> R13: Visitor Survey <b7> R14: Secondary Data <b7> R11/15: Capacity/Suitability Analysis (including trails) <b7> R16: Needs Analysis These will be electronically attached to these minutes. R15: Recreational trail Routing Chris is putting together a teamlet meeting to discuss the tabletop exercise that is the first step in this study. They will meet November 4th 10:00-2:00 p.m. HANDOUTS <b7> Preliminary PME Options, Recreational Resources Working Group Summary, October 7, 2002 <b7> Recreation Working Group Matrix, October 10, 2002 <b7> Hydroelectric Project Websites <b7> Outline for Protection, Mitigation, and Enhancement Measures, Submitted by the Participant for Baker River Hydroelectric Project No. 2150 <b7> Recreation Resources Working Group Meeting Norms <b7> Common PME Measures Appearing in the Baker River Working Groups, September, 2002 <b7> Preliminary materials from Study R16 Recreation Needs Analysis Task 6, Project Operations Assessment, including graph of Average Daily Lake Elevation, Baker Lake, 1974-2000, graphs of 90% and 50% reservoir elevations for Baker lake and lake Shannon, and spreadsheet tables with reservoir elevation exceedance levels and boat ramp minimum operating elevations <b7> High-Country Recreation Use by Baker Lake Overnight Visitors 9-18-02 (Draft Discussion Paper, repeat handout from September 23 meeting) <b7> Drafts of Recreation Needs Analysis Task 7, Visioning Exercise Outline Draft September 17, 2002 and October 23, 2002. PARKING LOT - Presentation of National Forest Plan - Land management - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Hold periodic "outreach" meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) - Field trip- summer 2003? - Review USFS Roads Analysis Report- 2003? - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups EVALUATION OF MEETING Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 5 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   Things Done Well <b7> Got out early <b7> Good to have Lyn back <b7> Welcome Joan! <b7> PSE and Forest Service took a big step in terms in defining a correct percentage Need for Improvement <b7> Need Terrestrial Working Group representative <b7> Need method for public input <b7> We miss Tony What's Hot? <b7> PMEs (schedule) <b7> ORVs TENTATIVE AGENDA November 18, 2002 Agenda <ad> PSE Office in Mount Vernon 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. PMES (teamlet report, etc.) 4. Studies: Debrief Visioning Exercise (tie to task 7 of Needs Analysis) Teamlet report: Trail Routing R5 <ad> Aesthetics R11 <ad> Guidance for assessing suitability and how we want to look at constraints 5. Set agenda for December 16 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense October 28, 2002 Page 6 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group    2002recreational20021028.pdf en 