BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group July 22, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043  AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Process for identifying draft PM&E measures 4. R16 Visioning Exercise teamlet report 5. Review of 2001 data/2002 data needs: R13 survey data 6. Results of WG review, areas to address 7. HYDROPS model – demo status, handouts 8. Set agenda and location for August meeting 9. Evaluate meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group July 22, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Ann Dunphy (U.S Forest Service), Ardis Bynum (U.S. Forest Service), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: The group welcomed Alex Cohen representing Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc. along with Chris Lawson. SCHEDULE: All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30. Next meeting dates: August 22, September 23, October 28, November 19, and December 17. Note: The August meeting will be at Sedro-Woolley, at the new Forest Service/Government Building. Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 1 of 6   July 22, 2002 Agenda 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p. m. Mountlake Terrace. WA NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. Process for identifying draft PM&E measures 4. R16 Visioning Exercise teamlet report 5. Review of 2001 data/20002 data needs: R13 survey data 6. Results of Working Group review, areas to address 7. HYDROPS model – demo status, handouts 8. Set agenda and location for August meeting 9. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS: • ALL: Review Chris’ preliminary draft for Visioning Exercise agenda. • ALL: Review list of 5 (12) issues on Dee’s handout plus others in notes and send ideas to Chris by July 31. • ALL: Send ideas for recreation-based operational scenarios to Tony. He will share it with the consultant who will do the HYDROPS demonstration for this Working Group. • Tony: Send out “final” versions of Process Document and Communication Protocol to members along with latest schedule. NOTE: The ALP was approved by FERC July 19, 2002. FERC indicated that they made some changes in the Process Document and Communication Protocol. Tony will send out the final versions as soon as they become available. • Tony: Bring land ownership map to next meeting. Ownership issues in Concrete and around boat ramp on Lake Shannon are still unclear. • Tony: Check current status of Trillium property ownership. • Lyn: Check with the Howards re: their participation. • Tony: Reserve conference call line for August 13 – 9:00 – 11:00. • Dee: Email out matrix that other Working Group settlement teamlets are using (for our reference). • Ann: Button up with Forest Service facilitator re: August 22 meeting. • Chris: Email out the results of R-13 to those who want it electronically. • Chris: Come up with draft reference list of R14 information sources. Send out for feedback prior to our August meeting. • Chris and Tony: Gather land-use information. • Ann/Chris: Determine viewpoints to use in aesthetics assessment, get photos from these points while the lake level is up. • Chris: Map what we need to do in the Working Group to a schedule. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Tony: Checked to see if 401Water Quality certification is current. PSE is currently operating under IPP (i.e., there currently is no 401 certification for the project). Preparation for Water Quality certification is underway (to be officially initiated with submittal of the license application). PROCESS FOR IDENTIFYING DRAFT PM&E MEASURES Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 2 of 6   Dee Endelman, of Agreement Dynamics, presented the Solution Team’s request that she start working with the Working Groups (approximately 1 ½ hours each meeting) to begin coming up with a very sketchy draft of potential PM&Es. She distributed a draft outline of the process along with an initial framing of the issues this group originally defined (in October 2000). Prior to this meeting, Chris reviewed the issues and came up with a list of five key issues (framed as problems to be solved). All were asked to review this list to see that the interests of their organizations are represented. The following additional issues or concepts were mentioned as important to be included in the list: • Nature study/observation • Dispersed camping • Consumptive uses (hunting/gathering/fishing/wood cutting, etc.) • Make sure the bullets listed under #1 respect balance with fish and wildlife • List ADA compliance separate from general public accessibility • Changing recreation needs • Balance of recreation between Baker and Shannon The Recreation Settlement Teamlet will meet via conference call on Tuesday, August 13, from 9:00 - 11:00. Teamlet members are Jim, Lauri, Chris, and Ann (with Ardis as backup). Dee will facilitate. R16: VISIONING EXERCISE TEAMLET Chris distributed notes from the teamlet conference call of May 24. They discussed the scope of participation that would be appropriate. Should it be limited mainly to current working group members? Should we include certain specialists e.g., Recreation Resource Management, Whatcom County, Skagit County, North Cascades Institute, Audubon Society (Christy Norman), Pacific Northwest Trails Association, Town of Concrete, Washington Outfitters and Guides Association? (The May 24 discussion resulted in the conclusion that participation in the visioning exercise should be limited, primarily to members of the recreation working group. This conclusion was revisited in the July 22 discussion.) Re: Format, Ann suggested that a USFS facilitator attend our August 22 meeting to explain the USFS “Recreation Focus” approach and provide a “train-the-trainer” session for us. Ann briefly described the “Recreation Focus” process. It involves breaking down the geographical areas into patterns of social use and identifying “special places” within these areas, identifying attributes that make those places special, and then brainstorming the future (addressing issues and how to handle conflicts). We discussed doing a first iteration with the Forest Service facilitator and then going through the process with the counties, City of Concrete, DNR, Crown Pacific, and the new Trillium property owner(s). We could then assess next steps based on the results of that exercise. Jim distributed a handout on estimates of future participation in outdoor recreation activities that he was preparing as an Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation report to support the Statewide Comprehensive Outdoor recreation Plan (SCORP). He suggested these trends should be taken into account in the Visioning Exercise. Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 3 of 6   We agreed to invite the Forest Service facilitator (Kathy Ludlow) to our August 22 meeting to explain the Forest Service process and work with us to develop an appropriate format for us to do the Visioning Exercise. As described in the Study Plan, the aim of this exercise is to identify improvements and management actions that may be needed but were not identified through any of the six preceding needs analysis tasks. This relates to the ninth stated objective for study R16, which is “What types of recreational activities are emerging uses or uses that might occur in the future, and are not currently supported by existing recreation facilities and management programs?” We agreed to consider using the regular September 23 meeting for the Visioning Exercise. We’ll determine appropriate next steps after meeting with the Forest Service facilitator at our August meeting. REVIEW OF 2001 DATA/2002 DATA NEEDS: R13 SURVEY DATA Chris distributed hard copies of R13 survey results received last week, and walked through the results for each question included in this package by presenting the spreadsheets on the projector. (These results are from second-stage processing of survey responses, focusing on various groups or subsets of the total population. Initial response tabulations for the total population were distributed in February 2002.) We discussed the data. The compilation of the second-stage results is nearly complete (results for the remaining questions should be available by end of July). Next Steps: Chris will email spreadsheets with complete results from the second-stage analysis for R13 as soon as they become available. R15: SECONDARY DATA COLLECTION This is ongoing. A few information sources have yet to be collected. Stay tuned. R9: ELECTRONIC MONITORING This is ongoing. (Counters were reinstalled in late April.) R11: CAPACITY AND SUITABILITY This is ongoing. (The primary component of this study is GIS analysis, which the Forest Service is preparing for the national forest lands and PSE will do for the Lower Baker area. Most of this work will follow the results of the needs analysis.) R15: RECREATIONAL TRAIL ROUTING This is ongoing (using same process as using for R11). R16: RECREATION NEEDS ANALYSIS This is ongoing. (The first six tasks, i.e., all tasks prior to the visioning exercise, have been started and are in various stages of completion.) STUDIES/PRODUCTS STILL TO BE ADDRESSED • R5 Visual and Aesthetics study • Report On Land Use Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 4 of 6   •  Recreation Management Plan  POTENTIAL 2003 STUDIES • Capacity/Suitability Analysis (intended for completion fall/winter 2002, may stretch into 2003) • R5 Visual and Aesthetics study: move from study request to study plan? Identify viewpoints? • Trailhead survey? (goats) • Supplemental surveys (field work) HYDROPS MODEL DEMONSTRATION Chris reported that the soonest we could get a demonstration would be this September. PSE is still working with the folks who put the model together to bolster the outputs. He distributed handouts that describe the model and what the outputs would entail. He also handed out a draft request form we would use to run various scenarios. RESULTS OF WORKING GROUP REVIEW, AREAS TO ADDRESS Chris distributed summarized data from the Working Group review conducted at the May meeting. Areas to address are pre-judging of people and ideas, sense of teamwork, behaviors matching words, giving more positive than negative feedback and willingness to compromise sometimes. For specific roles, the Team Leader needs to represent PSE’s interests in a more collaborative way and getting help to complete tasks in a more timely manner. (Welcome Alex!) The facilitator will work on enforcing group norms and remaining neutral regarding participant’s interests. Consultants need more help in getting work done in a timely manner. HANDOUTS • Memo on framing issues for collaborative problem solving, diagram of process for drafting PM&Es, outline for how to resolve issues jointly, and preliminary list of recreation issue statements. • Draft of Estimates of Future Participation in Outdoor Recreation in WA State: A Technical Report by the Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation • Draft 7/21/02 Recreation Needs Analysis Task 7, Visioning Exercise Outline/Agenda • Baker River system schematic diagram, slides on Skagit River routing and electricity demand forecasting from presentation on HYDROPS model, and draft HYDROPS model study request form • Working Group Evaluation from May 20, 2002. PARKING LOT - Visioning exercise - Organizational/agency goals - Bounce around with meeting locations - Operationally define “vicinity”, “watershed”, “project induced”, “dispersed”, or “displaced” - List authorities that this team must be aware of - Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole - Look into getting guest speaker from Seattle City Light - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 5 of 6   - Land management - SCORP data from Jim - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Need good maps of the project area - Consult with Jim Johnston (with WDFW) - Trailhead surveys - Have demonstration of Charles Howard Model EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Welcome Alex! • Susan helped us move forward- Thanks Susan! • John Wayne/zip code expressions • Raspberry Milanos • Dee’s guidance Need for Improvement • We lost Earl (moved on) • We are way behind given the time line WHAT’S HOT? • Lots of information to digest • Anxiety re: aggressive schedule • Expectation that we can make decisions without all information TENTATIVE AGENDA August 22, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office/Sedro-Woolley 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. PMEs 4. R16: Visioning Exercise • Kathy Ludlow – Forest Service facilitator the Portland region on “Recreation Focus” process • Where do we go from here? 5. Study Update 6. Set agenda and location for September 23 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting  Baker River Project Relicense July 22, 2002 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  Page 6 of 6    2002recreational20020722.pdf en 