 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group November 18, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Review / revise minutes / agenda 2. Review action items 3. PMEs Teamlet report, et cetera 4. Studies: Debrief Visioning Exercise (tie to task 7 of Needs Analysis) Teamlet report – Trail Routing R5 – Aesthetics R11 – Guidance for assessing suitability and how we want to look at constraints 5. Set agenda for December 16th meeting 6. Evaluate meeting Note: Bring lunch and be prepared to work through BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group November 18, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way, Mount Vernon, WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Anne Bussiere (interested citizen from the Town of Concrete), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Joan Nichol (Meridian Environmental, Inc. for the Louis Berger Group who will be developing the PDEA), Brian Adams (Skagit County), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation), Cary Feldmann and Andy Hatfield (PSE), Bruce Freet (Environmental Agreements) and Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Bullock, note taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.). SCHEDULE 2002: December 16th (third Monday) 2003: Jan..27, Feb. 24, Mar.24, Apr.28. May 19 (third Monday), Jun 23, Jul 28, Aug. 25, Sept.22. Oct 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday) Assume Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace unless otherwise specified. Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 1 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. INTRODUCTIONS: The group welcomed Anne Bussiere who owns a business in the Town of Concrete, Brian Adams from Skagit County and Patrick Goldsworthy with the North Cascades Conservation Council. November 18, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office/Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 1. Studies: Debrief Visioning Exercise (tie to task 7 of Needs Analysis) Teamlet report: Trail Routing R5 – Aesthetics R11 – Guidance for assessing suitability and how we want to look at constraints 4. PMES (teamlet report, etc.) 5. Set agenda for December 16 meeting 6. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Get Chris specific names/locations of attraction sites (other than developed/dispersed recreation sites) to include on the base map by November 27 (for R11/R15). • Tony/Andy: Send out updated ownership maps before next meeting. This is still in process of being revised. • Lauri: Ask the Terrestrial Working Group to define the level of constraints (High, Medium, Low) within each of the vegetation layers identified in their Basin Vegetation Cover-type Map, and get back to Chris. • Chris: Clarify WDFW property ownership. • Ann: Get Chris locations of known user-made trails by November 27 • Ann: Get Chris reference on Forest Service landslide analysis • Chris: Check gates and road objectives for the Forest Service, State and private lands. • Andy: Send out Marty’s PME drafts (Terrestrial Working Group) along with his initial draft for Recreation PMEs for our review (as examples). • Ann: What jurisdictions apply to surface water? • Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). We have already collected everything that we need to satisfy FERC requirements. • Lyn: Check out 2003 schedule against conference room calendar at USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Let Dee know if you have any changes to the PME matrix by noon on Tuesday, October 29. • Andy: Sent out an updated contact list of Working Group members. • Andy: Touched base with Tony/ Lauri re: wildlife connection. We will monitor this over time to see if we need to take steps to formalize this connection. Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 2 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • Lyn: Checked with the Howards re: their participation in our meetings. • Andy: Gave Joetta (R2) GPS data so she could plot viewpoints and map them to photos. Andy brought CDs of the reference photos and the corresponding map. • Andy: Contacted interested parties who are not regular attendees of this meeting to describe where we are in the process and how to include them. Andy made calls from the invitation list to the Visioning Exercise. • Ann: Sent Chris link to NVUM data website. • Ann: Let Don Gay know that we decided not to do trailhead surveys because the cost-benefit analysis was not persuasive. • Lyn: Let Lauri Vigue know that we decided not to do trail head surveys because the cost-benefit analysis was not persuasive • Lyn: Updated Norms (and distributed them to new members). • Sheryl: Contacted Steve Jennison re: his attending the Visioning Exercise on November 6th. • Ann: Checked availability of Forest Service Sedro-Woolley Office for teamlet meeting on November 4th. Debrief Visioning Exercise (tie to task 7 of Needs Analysis) There were 26 attendees at the Visioning Exercise in Mount Vernon, November 6. We split up into three facilitated groups. Group members listed special places in the basin and the attributes that made each place special. We then listed conflicts/hindrances to those attributes and brainstormed what the future may hold. Chris reported that the initial goal of the visioning exercise may not have been met (i.e.), to identify the un-served or under-served populations in the basin). Andy is working on compiling the data from the exercise. December 11, a teamlet will meet to look at the initial results. Andy suggested that by our next meeting on December16th we could get the write-up from the exercise distributed for review. We will define Next Steps at that time. STUDIES: Chris distributed the monthly Studies update (will be attached to minutes.): R9: Recreation Use Survey – Electronic Monitoring All electronic traffic monitors will be taken out in the next week. R12: Developed and Dispersed Site Inventory CDs with the preliminary results were given to the Forest Service in October 2002. The developed site records are nearly complete, may need spot checking at some sites. R13: Recreation Visitor Survey Interim report with summary documentation to be distributed prior to our December 16 meeting. R14: Secondary Data Collection (Road Access Analysis) Work is 90% completed. Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 3 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group R15: Recreational Trail Routing A teamlet met November 4 to look at potential trail routes for additional study. R2 is mapping these potential routes. They are awaiting our definition of constraint criteria. R11: Recreation Capacity and Suitability Analysis Chris distributed a GIS data layers scaling handout for trail routing. We need to look at each of the layers described on the handout and come up with high, medium and low constraints. R-2 will then develop a composite map showing which areas should not be considered for trail routing. Chris need input re: specific locations of popular sites to add to our base map e.g., waterfalls, hot springs, rock hounding/mining locations (see also data from the Visioning Exercise). Under Ecologically Sensitive Areas Lauri stressed the importance of using the most recent available data, and that it is important to keep in mind that this information may be updated as studies are completed in the other working groups. We may also consider (as potential PMEs) enhancements to or relocation of sections of existing trails. Second phase considerations (after we have identified potential new trails) will include and analysis for biological/cultural/insect and disease factors, Forest Service pre-Project screening. We discussed the need to conduct on-the-ground inspections to verify high constraint areas and user made trails. We agreed to remove slope as a constraint. We would look at trail gradient later on. We also agreed that we would like to offer a variety of trail gradients. We added “Ownership” to Land Management Designation Constraints: High = Owned by private individuals Medium = Non PSE/Non government organizations (Crown Pacific/Glacier/IP Forestry) Low = PSE, DNR, County Next Steps: We have a teamlet of Chris, Lauri, Ann and Jim, will meet to further refine/define constraints. R5 – Visuals and Aesthetics Study Andy has made CDs that show the photos from each of the reference view points identified so far along with the corresponding map. Chris sent out the initial draft of this study plan last week. Jim already provided feedback that the Study looked fine (pretty standard). Chris walked us through the Study Plan and asked for feedback by November 27. NOTE: There will be no standalone report for this. This will be written up in a format for inclusion in the PDEA PME TEAMLET REPORT Andy explained how he, Ann, Susan and Bruce affinitized the list of PMEs. He distributed this new list for our review. The list starts with 200 (Terrestrial Working Group has the 100 series.) Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 4 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Members expressed concern about their available time and energy when it comes to translating the eight PME descriptions into the format that Bruce came up with (and worked with the Terrestrial Working Group to revise). Members stated their preference would be to have Chris, Bruce and Andy take a first cut at drafting PMEs. Members could then review the draft PMEs between these meetings and discuss them during these meetings. HANDOUTS (Handouts to be posted on the web will be bolded) • Baker River Relicense Recreation Working Group Studies Update • R15 Trail Routing – GIS Data Layers Scaling Handout (Draft) • Preliminary Draft Study Plan for R5, Aesthetics Assessment • Soil Layers Feature Attribute Table • Recreation Management Plan Categories & Options PARKING LOT - Presentation of National Forest Plan - Land management - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) - Field trip- summer 2003? - Review USFS Roads Analysis Report- 2003? - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Pistachios! • Got out early • Good facilitation • Three “newish” folks! We appreciate them! Need for Improvement • Ran out of coffee/Pog What’s Hot? • Schedule: Timing of Studies vs. PMEs (stress) TENTATIVE AGENDA December 16, 2002 Agenda – USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. PMES (teamlet report, etc.) • Review drafts and assign leads for each (Jim-Trails) 4. Studies: Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 5 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group R5: Aesthetics R11/15: Teamlet report: Trail Routing R16: Visioning Study Draft (revised?) 5. Set agenda/location for Jan, Feb, Mar. meetings 6. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense November 18, 2002 Page 6 of 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  