 MEETING MINUTES Upstream and Downstream Fish Passage Technical Working Group Mission Statement: To develop an efficient fish passage design for the Baker River Project. Project: Baker River Project FERC No. 2150 Written By: Kim Lane Meeting Date: May 7, 2002 Location: Upper Baker Lodge, Baker River Project Attendees: Ken Bates WDFW Ed Meyer, NMFS Dee Endelman, AD Wayne Porter, PSE Cary Feldmann, PSE Don Schluter, TU (conference line) Steve Fransen, NMFS Gary Sprague, WDFW Brady Green, USFS Jim Stow, USFWS MaryLouise Keefe, MWH Nick Verretto, PSE Kim Lane, PSE Stan Walsh, SSC Purpose: The purpose of the meeting was to continue development of conceptual design alternatives required for evaluation of downstream and upstream fish passage facilities in the course of relicensing the Baker River Hydroelectric Project, and to select an alternative for upstream passage. Future meeting dates: July 9, Tuesday, 9 a.m. conference call to discuss biological studies/ phone no. 1-866-280-6429 (144995#) August 6, Tuesday, 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - passage design at Sea-Tac September 11 Wednesday, 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - passage design at Sea-Tac Item Description Description Action, By 5.1a Report on Completed Refer to notes from last meeting: All – will Action Items: • A site visit was conducted of Lower and Upper Baker areas. participate in • A weekly studies update call was conducted on May 6, 2002. weekly studies • Mort - Modified the summary of alternative tables per comments update calls. and sorted the tables first by alternative and then chronologically. He e-mailed the group after incorporating these changes. • Ken - “Invited” (gave access to) Nick, Mort and Kim to review the documentation web site. • Mort - Continued advancing design alternatives LB F.9 & F.10, LB FL.6 & FL.7 for the next meeting. • Mort - Discussed UB FL.6 design limitations with a structural engineer. • Mort - Advanced designs U2.1 & U2.2, U3.1 & U3.2. • Kim - E-mailed upstream destination matrix spread sheets to group for review. 5.1b Carry-over Action • Nick - Design of the PSE fish truck is in progress. A discussion Items will take place at a future meeting. (item 5.16 below) • Don - Contact Trout Unlimited office regarding the organization’s position on acceptance of trap-and-haul alternative and need for fish ladder/volitional passage. • Nick – Will bring upstream correlation matrix issue to "flows” group and meet with Brian (MWH), Sue and Phil (R2). • Nick - Coordinate visit of Howard Hansen physical model after the May meeting. Contact Chick Sweeney of ENSR or Fred Goetz of ACE. • Don – Researched basis of tram at Cowlitz and current status. Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002 Page 1 of 5 Item Description Description Action, By • Don - Report back regarding Trout Unlimited’s position on removal of ladder. • Destination matrix will be addressed at a future meeting. • Nick – to contact TU and American Rivers. • Dee – to contact Don. 5.2 Technical Memo The items distributed at the meeting were: May 7, 2002 agenda Mort and Nick Distribution (PSE), April 2, 2002 meeting minutes (PSE), working group list are to draft a (PSE), studies coordination summary sheets (PSE), upstream and letter downstream technical memo tracking documents (MWH), upstream summarizing & downstream alternatives tracking documents (MWH), studies upstream design information tracking document (MWH), summary of Ken’s document selection and e- tracking method (MWH), Draft TM Rev. 1 Alt. LB FL.3 (barge 20%), mail to Don Draft TM Alt. LB FL.7 (MIS 60%), Draft TM Alt. UB FL.6 (MIS full); LB FL.3.0), LB FL.7.0 LB FL.6.0, LB F.9.0, LB F.6.0, UB Dee: is to call FL.7.0, U2.1, U2.2 U3.1 , U3.2. Don regarding upstream design selection. 5.3 Biological Studies MaryLou reported on studies in progress. Radio tag studies are to be Progress report Update moved to next week due to insufficient numbers of fish available for at next meeting. tagging. No kelts were attracted to gulper acoustic-tagging fish will be held for 24 hours to allow for a full five days to track. Fish are not moving as we had hoped due to low flows since it is too cold for ice to melt. Due to low fish collections at trap, choice of coho for study wil be 1) wild 1+, 2) wild 2+, 3) previously marked 2+, 4) previously marked 2+ 4) net pen fish from LB. A good number of marked fish, which were put up in the reservoir to measure gulper efficiency, are coming out now. They have easily identifiable freeze brands. Also could not get enough fish to radio tag in one day, only 11 fish in two days (22 required). Will capture tag and release over two days. Nick – Discussion on Biological Studies Update; had one meeting and will have several more weekly updates. 5.4 Technical Memo Data management system was discussed. Quickbase was examined A trial use of Tracking Log by Mort who reviewed limitations of this software system. MWH and Quickbase is PSE are examining alternative MS portal based systems for a more proposed to permanent comment tracking system. Quickbase has a limit of determine 550MB, which would fill up very quickly. features that are important in Mort - Revised and issued templates of technical memo status. Ken Portal system. Bates sent out an invite for web based document system. Mort and Kim to set up a plan on the EDM system and report by next meeting. 5.5 Charles Howard Will have a workshop June 12th at PSE’s Bellevue office. Hope to Model have some trail criteria before then. This workshop will allow attendees to get experience with the model. 5.6 Review of Draft TM Reservoir Fish Attraction Barge / 20% Flow / 0.4 fps. Rev. 1 LB FL.3 LB FL3 was presented Rev 1, which has a control weir with pumps and based on MaryLou's work one will be able to determine depth and location of fish. The location of the barrier net appears to be in good condition based upon today’s site visit. The side discharge which avoids thrust may set up eddies that could affect attraction. It would be better to reduce vibration and consider alternative ways to Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002 Page 2 of 5 Item Description Description Action, By separate pumps from main structure. Last item discussed was to upgrade electrical feed due to size of motors (1 MW). 5.7 Review of MIS / 60% Flow / High Velocity Group does not Alternative LB FL.7 LB FL7 rev 1 60% MIS uses up to 3000 cfs. Fig 1 new extension of see any fatal penstock on bench to area by net. Fig 2 showed plans of MIS flaw with this Screens. 50 cfs per screen on bypass with 3 screens this system alternative. becomes very complex. Includes a floating system with cable guides If a decision is to raise and lower screens. Length of MIS is related to flow, a 35-foot made to screen will have a 700-cfs flow and is the largest system designed to advance with it date. then fish size needs to be The largest built is thought to be around 500 cfs. Width of channel is taken into a concern because it may create hydraulic conditions that are not fish consideration as friendly. it relates to the design of the Cleaning of MIS is done by rotating the screens and allowing the structure. For material caught on a screen to flow into the penstock. example, smaller fish Hydraulic model and balancing of the system will be a large concern such as fry in its design as well as a biological study of the systems effectiveness. would require a much longer Need to focus on what would be the limitations of such a system for facility. Upper and Lower Baker and also need a determination of the size of the fish. Mort will research the Jim suggested a V-shaped crowder that would raise and crowd fish largest screen and then flip to a vertical position for the return down. that would still be a practical alternative. 5.8 Review of MIS / Full Flow (5000 cfs ) / High Velocity Alternative LB FL.6 DS LB FL.6 Full Flow MIS alternative, a very large and wide structure which utilizes attraction water pumps. Don suggested a snake-like staggered plan for bypass pipeline, which would be a more natural means of transport. However this is a transportation option and the alternative is focused on collection issues. Review of Alternative UB FL6 UB FL6 was briefly presented and it is similar in scope and comments to UB F9. DOWNSTREAM ALTERNATIVE MATRIX (Lower Baker) was presented by Mort so the group could get an understanding of the matrix and how it tracks status of Technical Memos. 1. 5.9 Review of MIS / Full Flow (5000 cfs ) / High Velocity Alternative LB F.9 LB F9 is a system that uses submergible travelling screens and guides fish into a hopper. Fig 3 shows this feature and how fish would move over weir into raceways. Fish go into an up well where they are transported out to weir and into collection pen. 5.11 Summarization of Mort reviewed existing alternatives using upstream alternatives memo Remaining Upstream tracking summary document. Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002 Page 3 of 5 Item Description Description Action, By Alternatives, TMs 5.12 Review of Reviewed see item 5.15 below AlternativeU2.1 and U2.2 5.13 Review of Reviewed see item 5.15 below Alternative U3.1 5.14 Review of Reviewed see item 5.15 below Alternative U3.2 5.15 Upstream All upstream alternatives were reviewed and discussed extensivly. Alternative Selection and Discussion These alternative are U1.1 – LB/UB Fluctuating Pool Fish Ladder U1.2 – LB/UB Fixed Pool Fish Ladder U1.3 – Barrier Dam /Upper Baker Fish Ladder and Channel U2.1 – Trap and Haul at Barrier Dam U2.2 – Trap and Haul at both Barrier Dam and Upper Baker Dam U.3.1. and U3.2 – Combination Trap and Haul, Fish Tramway and Fish Locks. Alteratives U1.1 - .3 were not carried forward due to decision by group that a fish ladder would have negative impact in seveeal areas on fish passage. There are many concerns with alternative U2.2 and U3.3 and U3.2, which are listed below. Decision was made to advance Alterantive 2.1 and not advance other upstream alternatives for the below reasons. 1 Delay and loss of adults moving through the reservoir, possible straying of fish. 2. There is very minimal (lack of) spawning and rearing habitat in Lake Shannon tributaries. 3. Trapping fish at both locations would .result in handling fish twice for transit to upper reservoir. 4. Forced migration would increase stress from abrupt changes in physical and biological conditions. 5. Losses of fish due to fall back of fish due to spill. 6. Water Quality due to flow and temperature created fish losses. 7. Reservoir transit time compared to being trucked. 8. Environmental impacts of building two facilities instead of one. 9. Additional mechanical complexity with other alternatives. 10. Additional complexity adds to risk of failure of other alternatives. 11. Other alternatives do not allow for out of basin transport therefore a truck would still be required. 12. No one knows of a system with vertical lift. 13. Other alternatives are at risk of failure due to landslides or other possible acts of god. Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002 Page 4 of 5 Item Description Description Action, By 14. Char and trout connectivity can be accommodated by the use of a portable trap at upstream end of Lake Shannon Summary:, For the reasons cited above the group has decided to advance a trap and haul alternative to be located at Lower Baker Dam, as defined in U2.1. This agreement will be formalized in more detail with documentation to be provided by MWH. At next meeting Group will meet then to provide consensus to a technical memorandum that will state reasoning for advancement of alternative 2.1. 5.16 Other Issues • Fish truck - no additional design information on fish truck was available for this meeting. • Charles Howard Model - Full-day workshop scheduled June 12 at PSE Bellevue office. • Coordination of visit for Howard Hansen physical model will occur after the May meeting. 5.17 Meeting Evaluation, Positive: Review Assignments Good facilitation. Everyone worked hard. Decisions were made. Location not at SeaTac. Field visit completed. Negative: Trying to make phone work- distracting. 5.18 Next Meetings, June 4th Tentative Meeting Agenda, 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. @ WestCoast Facilitation SeaTac Hotel (CANCELLED) Review agenda & handouts Administrative tracking procedures development Downstream Passage Review minutes & action items Biological studies update Summarize remaining alternatives, TMs Designs review – LB FL.3 & .7 & .6, F.9 & F.10, UB FL.7 Discussion of 3 downstream options (2 LB, 1 UB) maybe “part of shelf.” Trout and Char traps Upstream Passage Review minutes & action items Review remaining alternatives & TMs Designs review – U2.1 &2.2 & 3.1 & 3.2 Upstream alternative selection and discussion Fish transport destination matrix development Develop design of U2.1 Other issues – fish truck, operations model Evaluate meeting & review assignments Schedule next meetings, agenda, and facilitation Filename: Baker Passage Minutes 05-07-2002 Page 5 of 5  