 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group May 20, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. PSE Business Office 1700 College Way E. Mount Vernon, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Trailhead survey needs (teamlet report) 4. Local knowledge of Lake Shannon conditions 5. Pending future study requests: • land management • aesthetics 6. 2001 data analysis status and needs 7 Update on visioning exercise (teamlet report) 8. Conduct working group review 9. Set agenda and location for June 24 meeting, set location for July 22, check date for August meeting 10. Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group May 20, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. PSE Business Office, Mount Vernon, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman. com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tfuchs@puget.com PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Lauri Vigue (WA Department Fish & Wildlife), Ann Dunphy and Ardis Bynum (Forest Service), Jim Eychaner (Interagency Committee for Outdoor Recreation), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Laura and Ken Howard (Interested Citizens), Earl Dierking (Skagit County Parks & Recreation), Lyn Wiltse (PDSA Consulting, facilitator). SCHEDULE CHANGES AND MEETING LOCATIONS: Other 2002 dates: June 24, July 22, August 9/10 (or 26?), Sep. 23, Oct. 28, Nov. 18, Dec. 16. NOTE: Be prepared to report on action taken on Action Items at our next meeting. AGENDA FOR MAY MEETING May 20, 2002 Agenda – PSE Office in Mount Vernon 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Trailhead survey needs (teamlet report) Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 1 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse 4. Local knowledge of Lake Shannon conditions 5. Pending future study requests • land management • aesthetics 6. 2001 data analysis status and needs 7. Update on visioning exercise (teamlet report) 8. Conduct working group review 9. Set agenda and location for June 24 meeting, set location for July 22, check date for August meeting 10. Evaluate meeting INTRODUCTIONS We welcomed Ken and Laura Howard, interested citizens, to their first working group meeting. NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Send ideas for recreational scenarios to Tony. He will share it with the consultant who will do the HYDROPS demonstration for this Working Group. • ALL: Let Chris know ASAP if you or a representative from your organization plan to attend the HYDROPS model workshop (all day) at the PSE Bothell Office on June 12. • Tony: Send Chris information to send out to members on HYDDROPS workshop by end of week. • Tony: Send out “final” versions of Process Document and Communication Protocol to members along with latest schedule. • Tony: Bring land ownership map to next meeting. • Chris: Share dispersed campsite map with Ken and Laura (to verify inventoried locations on Lake Shannon). • Tony: Check to see if 401Water Quality certification is current. Have there been changes in State standards since last certification was issued? • Tony: Check with Andy re: having August 9 and 10 meeting at the Lodge. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Rod: Got Chris contact for electric-eye counters (hand-delivered May 21) • Chris: Called Roger DeSpain (Whatcom County) re: attending our meetings, but was not able to speak with him. Earl volunteered to follow up on this item. • Chris: Still to contact Mark McFarlane of DNR to get copy of regional report on recreation that DNR is preparing (there is no data in the foothills study applicable to the Baker studies/analysis, and DNR may be cutting back on recreation management). • Ann: Sent Chris a copy of information related to the Forest Service ATM plan • Ann: Sent Chris electronic copy of historical lake levels summary prepared earlier by FS. • Chris: Draft study plan for aesthetics study. • Chris: Will check with Jessie Piper in Cultural Working Group on Tribal recreation representative for Visioning Exercise after teamlet meeting • Tony: Will schedule HYDROPS model demo for June meeting (depending on consultant’s availability). Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 2 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse • Tony: Got Chris contact information for the Audubon Society (Christy Norman). • Teamlet: Will hold conference call for further planning on R16 Visioning Exercise on May 24 (Tony Fuchs, Ann Dunphy, Earl Dierking, Jim Eychaner, Chris Lawson). TRAILHEAD SURVEY NEEDS (TEAMLET REPORT) Chris distributed a draft summary of a March 12, 2002 conference call/meeting of a teamlet assigned to review the 2001 survey responses with respect to actual coverage and potential needs for additional 2002 work (see handout). They reviewed the survey response from the Recreation Visitor Survey Study (R13) to determine if the sample size was representative and adequate. They also discussed potential needs for additional data related to questions such as trailhead surveys and reservoir level effects. The group agreed that the 2001 survey sample was, in general, sufficiently large and diverse. A possible exception was Lake Shannon, where approximately 70 surveys were collected. There was also a question whether 80 was a sufficient sample size for dispersed campers. In considering whether to do trailhead surveys in 2002, we will look at two things: 1. % of Baker Lake overnight users who go to the high country 2. % of total high-country users represented by that number. The teamlet decided to try to get these numbers by combining 2001 survey and existing Forest Service data, rather than do a full-fledged trailhead survey program. Ann suggested the FS trailhead compliance ratios (the proportion of trail users signing the trailhead register) may not be current, and perhaps some representative sampling could help verify or revise these numbers. PSE expects to have additional survey response analysis available for the June working group meeting, and a first cut at the high-country user figures based on existing information. The group will consider the trailhead survey question again at our next meeting. LOCAL KNOWLEDGE OF LAKE SHANNON CONDITIONS Ken and Laura Howard described the 150-acre tree farm and cabin they have near Lake Shannon. Their primary interests are: • Protecting and managing forest/wildlife • Fire prevention/maintenance • Control of hunting (especially with dogs) • Future conditions at Lake Shannon, primarily for recreation • ownership and continued public use of boat launch site (Is the land for sale by Glacier? If so, they hope that PSE, Skagit County and others will work together to purchase and protect/maintain access. They hope a boat launch won’t be built at Thunder Creek.) • signage and map at launch providing user information • marking and/or removal of snags below high water (impacts boating and jet skiing safety) • improved dispersed campsites along lakeshore (with need for fire prevention/control Ken and Laura noted their appreciation for PSE. They (PSE) have been good neighbors and the Howards appreciate the power. They want to support PSE in responsibly managing the recreation and wildlife resources around Lake Shannon. Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 3 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse PENDING FUTURE STUDY REQUESTS Land Management Chris has outlined the FERC requirements around land management. To date there is no study request. We will hope to review this by August. R5: Aesthetics Chris and Ann are working on fleshing out this study request. We hope to review this by our July meeting. 2001 DATA ANALYSIS STATUS AND NEEDS R-9 Recreation Use Survey –Electronic Monitoring. Last week Chris got the remaining files on the 2001 electronic count data from Trafficount. These data (in Excel format) cover June 22 through October 15. We will continue to monitor traffic counts at two locations in the future (Road 11 and Road 1107 on the other side of the dam, by the Crown gate). Chris will incorporate results from the manual traffic counts and summarize these data for our review. R12: Developed and Disposed Site Inventory. The records from the dispersed site inventory forms have been entered into an access database, which have also been scanned and put onto CDs. Chris will verify these data and make additional CDs to distribute this information, when ready. We will then review the Excel summaries of database queries and decide how best to package them for distribution. R13 Recreation Visitor Surveys. We have another set of Excel summaries of the observation data from R13. These include dispersed campsite occupancy information. Chris is verifying these data. He needs input on the best way to condense and share the data from these 20 various files. Survey responses: At the March 12 teamlet meeting, they identified some additional ways we wanted to process these results. Chris hopes to get this request to Hebert Research soon, in time for these data to be ready to review at our meeting in June. UPDATE ON VISIONING EXERCISE Chris reported that the teamlet assigned to this item was not able to schedule a meeting by May 17 as originally planned, but would have a conference call on May 24. He also noted there were concerns about inviting too many people with diverse interests to the visioning exercise, which would not fit with the specific focus of this task. Jim suggested we need to take great care to manage expectations of this visioning exercise. He suggests we bring in statewide SCORP data and use the 16 major activity groups as points to discuss the potential of each. He proposes that it is most appropriate, at this point in the process, to limit participation in this exercise to the Working Group. A second option would be to open it up to a somewhat broader audience by inviting recreation “movers & shakers” who could lend their expertise and support. LIST OF POTENTIAL VARIABLES/SCENARIOS FOR THE HYDROPS MODEL In preparation for a productive future demonstration of the HYDROPS model, the group identified several potential operating scenarios that it would like to see run through the model: • Full pool (normal operating) from the start of fishing season to Columbus Day Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 4 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse • Full pool from Memorial Day to Labor Day. • Minimum levels required for boat launches to be operational • Scenarios of power peaking particularly in the winter time - wetland and shoreline impacts • Models being examined for fish passage/management regimes/flood control • Project operations for generation/flood control WORKING GROUP REVIEW We rated how we were doing as a Working Group on the 12 factors that Rhonda Hillyer outlined as characteristics of a collaborative group. We also filled out a written form to evaluate the team leader, facilitator and consultants. We will review the results at our next meeting. HANDOUTS • The Great Washington Birding Trail, Cascade Route…Audubon Washington • 2001 Survey Data Analysis Teamlet, Summary of March 12, 2002 Meeting/Conference Call. PARKING LOT • Operationally define “project induced” • Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups • Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) • Land management • Forest Service presentation of SMS • Trailhead surveys • Have demonstration of Charles Howard Operational Model (this April?) • Refer to April 26, 2000 Interest List. • R5 – Aesthetics Study • Water quality study (recreation induced) – Aquatics Working Group • Presentation of National Forest Plan • Review Forest Service road analysis reports • Button up with Christy Norman (Audubon) • Trailhead surveys • Have field trip (meet up at the Lodge) this summer? MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones: • Got out early • Welcome to Ken and Laura! • High attendance Things to Change: • No Mint Milanos • Need to have lots of data and analysis to review at next meeting Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 5 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse • Get better maps with ownership clearly identified TENTATIVE AGENDA FOR JUNE MEETING June 24, 2002 Agenda – Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. R16: Visioning Exercise teamlet report 4. Demo of Charles Howard HYDROPS model (?) 5. Review 2001 data and trailhead survey question 6. Results of WG review; areas to address 7. Set agenda and location for July and August meetings, and August date 8. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense May 20, 2002 6 RECREATION Resources Working Group File: 5-20-02 rec mtg notes; Lyn Wiltse Baker Relicensing Recreational Working Group Review May 20, 2002 Strongly Neutral Strongly Team Leader Agree Disagree • Coordinates Communication 71% 29% 0% • Represents PSE’s interests in a 57% 43% 0% collaborative/respectful way Suggestions: • Hire additional help to complete tasks in timely manner. Hire expertise when needed to support study analysis. Anticipate work groups study needs to keep process working ahead to meet PSE FERC timeline • Very knowledgeable on FERC process Strongly Neutral Strongly Facilitator Agree Disagree • Keeps things moving 100% 0% 0% • Enforces group norms 75% 25% 0% • Lets the ownership stay with the participants 100% 0% 0% • Is neutral (re: the interest of participants) 75% 25% 0% Suggestions: • Excellent, upbeat, efficient • Please pay attention to wearing a neutral hat. Keep humor! Strongly Neutral Strongly Consultants Agree Disagree • Knowledgeable/experienced 43% 43% 14% • Responsive to Working Group 43% 29% 29% Suggestions: • Either consultants not given appropriate tasks or not well qualified or not provided with necessary resources to complete tasks in a timely and complete manner. Tabulations from data provided but little if any analysis of data. R2 has been more responsive with GIS mapping is exception. • May need more help to get all of the work done • Reluctant not motivated sometimes to meet the needs of the group esp. timelines. Any other comments • I think this working group works well together, has made lots of progress, still has many difficult decisions and discussions ahead of it. • This form needs a 5 point scale. 1 Recreational Essential Components for Group Success May 20, 2002 Agreed Neutral Strongly Strongly Disagree 1. Willingness to reciprocate – commitment to meeting 100% others’ interests as well as your own. 2. Clear, direct, timely, complete (relevant) information 75% 25% sharing. 3. Assumption checking and no pre-judgment of people 87% 13% and/or ideas. 4. Safe to disagree. 75% 25% 5. Camaraderie / Esprit de Corps (sense of all being in 25% 75% this together. 6. Idea generation and creative thinking 50% 50% 7. Disclosure of interests. 75% 25% 8. Solutions not dictated, imposed, or offered 100% prematurely. 9. Honesty 75% 25% 10. Behaviors match words 14% 86% 11. Substantially more positive than negative feedback 25% 75% over time 12. Willingness to compromise sometimes 25% 75% 1  