 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group August 22, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Mt. Baker Ranger District Office 810 State Route 20 Sedro-Woolley, WA AGENDA 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review action items 3. Settlement process/PM&E scoping 4. R16 Visioning Exercise • Kathy Ludlow – FS facilitator on “Recreation Focus” process • Where do we go from here? 5. Studies update 6. Set agenda and location for September 23 meeting, set location for October 28 7 Evaluate meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group August 22, 2002 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Sedro-Woolley, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates) (425) 828-4463, clawson@huckellweinman.com PSE Contact: Tony Fuchs: (425) 462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Chris Lawson and Alex Cohen (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Susan Rosebrough (National Park Service), Ann Dunphy (US Forest Service), Ardis Bynum (US Forest Service), Sheryl Wimberly (WA Dept. Natural Resources), Cindy Bjorklund (North Cascades National Park), Kathy Ludlow (Forest Service Regional Office), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Dee Endelman (Agreement Dynamics), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) Note: The group welcomed Cindy Bjorklund of the North Cascades National Park and Sheryl Wimberly of WDNR as new members to the group. We also welcomed Kathy Ludlow from the FS Regional Office. SCHEDULE: All meetings are from 9:00 to 2:30. NOTE: Sept. 9 from 9-11 is Conf. Call Teamlet for Visioning Ex. Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 1 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Next meeting dates: September 23 at USFS Office in Mountlake Terrace, October 28 at USFS Office in Sedro-Woolley(?), November 19, and December 17. August 22, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office/Sedro-Woolley 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. PMEs with Dee Endelman 4. R16: Visioning Exercise • Kathy Ludlow – Forest Service facilitator the Portland region on “Recreation Focus” process • Where do we go from here? 5. Study Update 6. Set agenda and location for September 23 meeting 7. Evaluate meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • ALL: Consider if/how/when we continue with Needs Analysis Visioning Exercise and be prepared to discuss at Sept. 9 conference call from 9:00 – 11:00 (Call 1-866-280-6429 and enter participant code when prompted: 144995 followed by the # sign.) • ALL: Review updated matrix and be ready to discuss/evaluate at September meeting. Give Dee additional feedback by September 3 so she can send out a new matrix for review by Sept. 5. • ALL: Consider ideas for recreation-based scenarios to run through HYDROPS model. We will be getting a demo of this model at our September 23 meeting. • ALL: Review Working Group Operating Norms to see if/how they should be revised. We will discuss at our September meeting. • Chris: Button up with Lloyd re: IP Forestry attending our meetings. • Tony: Bring updated land ownership map(s) to next meeting. • Dee: Update PME matrix and send out for our review. • Lyn: Check with the Howards re: their participation in our meetings. • Chris/Tony: Continue to evaluate land-use information (February timeframe). We have already collected everything that we need to satisfy FERC requirements. • Ann: Check with Andy to take pictures and get digital (GPS) locations of each viewpoint • Ann: Bring pictures and maps of locations to September meeting. • Chris: Email out results of R13 to those who want it (as soon as it becomes available). • Chris: Map what we need to do as a Working Group in terms of the broader relicensing schedule. • Chris: Check with Lloyd re: when/how to involve IP Forestry in these meetings. • Susan: Check with Jim re: conference call on September 9th from 9:00 to 11:00 a.m. • Ann: Send out Visioning Exercise information to Jim and Lauri to review. • Tony: Reserve conference call line for September 9 meeting. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Tony: Distributed the final official versions of the Communications Protocol and Process Document. See note on Solution Team Update below. • Tony: Checked the current status of former Trillium property (now owned by IP Forestry). They are Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 2 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group applying for a Forest Practices Application (FPA). Ownership issues in Concrete and around boat ramp on Lake Shannon are still unclear. They should be resolved by the end of August. • Tony brought updated ownership map for the project boundary. • Ann/Chris: Determined viewpoints to use in aesthetics assessment using a historic model. • Chris: Mapped what we need to do in the Working Group to an overall schedule, then heard from Lloyd that the larger schedule had to be changed; he will revise this schedule accordingly. PROCESS FOR IDENTIFYING DRAFT PM&E MEASURES Dee distributed copies of the Recreation issues framed by the Settlement Teamlet as seven problems to be solved. The teamlet also began brainstorming possible PMEs that might address these issues. We reviewed this list and clarified some of the existing language. We also added new potential PMEs. Dee will integrate these edits into the matrix and send out by August 26. All were asked to get additional suggestions to Dee by September 3rd. She will send out the revised matrix by September 5 for all to review (she will include everyone on the broader distribution list for this Working Group). At our September 23 meeting, we will begin to narrow the list of PMEs according to the criteria set by the Solution Team (legal, pertaining to project P/M/Es technically feasible). We will begin discussing how various PMEs do/don’t meet various interests. SOLUTION TEAM UPDATE Tony distributed the FERC approved versions (dated August 2002) of the Communication Protocol and Process Document. They are bound as they won’t be confused with the many previous drafts. He also distributed a Contact Log Form for us to use (according to the Process Document) when we want a conversation entered into the official record. The Solution Team has delayed their October meeting to October 30 to give Working Groups as much time as possible to come up with their draft PMEs. John Blair is our assigned FERC representative for this Working Group. He may be out this way in October to attend one of our meetings. He might also be available by phone for future meetings. R16: VISIONING EXERCISE TEAMLET Kathy Ludlow of the FS Regional Office in Portland teamed with Ann to lead us through the Recreation Focus process commonly used by the Forest Service for visioning. We started by mapping the recreation role of the Baker/Shannon Basins in the context of the area that it serves. We did this by labeling specific use/area on tracing paper over the top of the map. We then started to lump these into specific areas. For the first two “lumps”, we listed the following attributes and deviations: Baker River Trail Attributes: • Fish viewing • Easily accessible to many • End of the road • Good, short hike with lots of wildlife • Facilities • Quieter area • Mountain goat viewing Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 3 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • Play on river bottom, beaches, multi-use • Freedom to pick activity and place to do things Deviations: • Must have Northwest Forest Pass---long way in and no place to buy up there • Trash, parties • Wheeled access to river bed • Riparian and aquatic habitat concerns West Pass Dike/Depression Lake Attributes: • Year round boat ramp • Well developed heated bathroom • Baker Lake Lodge is a community retreat center, the only big developed group area in Baker Lake. • Kulshan Campground is a large developed campground with a variety of sites, most with water and sewer service; one of only two facilities at Baker Lake with utility RV sites • Day use – use of water edge, covered picnic area • Bank fishing area – some good views, grassy areas • Depression Lake – stocked with trout year round • Lots of amenities for cheap price • Drive through – shady areas • Traditional long time use Deviations: • Aesthetics lacking at camp ground • Potential road repair needed Potential next steps: Move from the places and why people are there to what is the essence of each area. We could also discuss activities that should be allowed/limited in order to preserve the essence of the area. Then we could discuss the most important things about the deviations and what we want to handle in the short-term vs. long-term. Are there secondary issues we would want to monitor going forward? Also, what are the essential kernels we need to keep in order to preserve the “specialness” of that place. We would make choices based on the values that people have. FEEDBACK RE: DOING THIS VISIONING EXERCISE PROCESS • Time/level of effort required. • Getting a representative group is imperative • We need to be able to predict the future. This would help us do that. • Can be a one-day gut check. • Is this outside of the relicensing process? • Getting a representative group would be a real challenge. • Overlap with existing Needs Analysis? Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 4 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group • Helps create educated PMEs • Might not promote new information. • Would be a good way to get other people involved – timing is off? • How can we take the lists of these data useful for us? • Don’t want to set unrealistic expectations. • This is outside the scope of the approved Needs Analysis study plan. • Gathering values vs. activity – not rushing to solutions. We would be asking: “What do you do out there? Why? Where?” • This is another way of getting a broader perspective – move forward looking. • This might supplant the entire Needs Analysis (sunk costs). STUDIES UPDATE Chris distributed a handout giving the status of all studies, with tentative deliverable dates (see attached). STUDIES/PRODUCTS STILL TO BE ADDRESSED • R5 Visual and Aesthetics study • Report On Land Use • Recreation Management Plan POTENTIAL 2003 STUDIES • Capacity/Suitability Analysis (intended for completion fall/winter 2002, may stretch into 2003) • R5 Visual and Aesthetics study: move from study request to study plan? Identify viewpoints? • Trailhead survey? (goats) • Supplemental surveys (field work) HANDOUTS • The Official Version of the Alternative Licensing Procedure (ALP) Communications Protocol and Process Document • Sample of Contact Log Form to be used to enter conversations into the official record (as per the Communications Protocol) • Updated version of contact list for this Working Group • Meeting Visioning Agenda (prepared by Kathy Ludlow and Ann Dunphy) • Studies Update 8/22/02 (see attached) PARKING LOT - Visioning exercise - Organizational/agency goals - Bounce around with meeting locations - Operationally define “vicinity”, “watershed”, “project induced”, “dispersed”, or “displaced” - List authorities that this team must be aware of - Look at dispersed recreation with the Project as a whole - Look into getting guest speaker from Seattle City Light - Tie education piece to ALL Working Groups - Hold periodic “outreach” meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 5 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group - Land management - SCORP data from Jim - Forest Service presentation of SMS - Need good maps of the project area - Consult with Jim Johnston (with WDFW) - Trailhead surveys - Have demonstration of Charles Howard Model EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Kathy’s presence/presentation/facilitation • Cindy and Sheryl as new members • PME progress • Being in Sedro-Woolley • Nice variety of food Need for Improvement • Leaking light fixtures • No Bismarcks! What’s Hot? • How we’ll conduct our Needs Analysis TENTATIVE AGENDA September 23, 2002 Agenda – USFS Office - Mountlake Terrace 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. NOTE: BRING LUNCH; BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review/revise minutes/agenda 2. Review Action Items 3. HYDROPS model demo 4. PMEs 5. R16: Visioning Exercise Teamlet (conference call) report/next steps 5. Studies Update 6. Set agenda and location for October 28 meeting (at FS Office in Sedro-Woolley) 7. Evaluate meeting Baker River Project Relicense August 22, 2002 Page 6 of 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group  