MEETING MINUTES Upstream Fish Passage Technical Working Group Mission Statement: To develop an efficient fish passage design for the Baker River Project.  Project: Written By: Meeting Date: Location: Attendees:  Baker River Project FERC No. 2150  Dawn Schink  February 4, 2002  WestCoast SeaTac Hotel, Seattle  Doug Bruland, PSE Cary Feldmann, PSE Steve Fransen, NMFS Mary Lou Keefe, MWH Kim Lane, PSE Mort McMillen, MWH Ed Meyer, NMFS  Wayne Porter, PSE Dawn Schink, PSE Fred Seavey, USFWS Gary Sprague, WDFW Jim Stowe, USFWS Ron Twiner, PSE Nick Verretto, PSE Stan Walsh, SSC  Purpose:  The purpose of the meeting was to continue development of design alternatives for upstream fish passage facilities at the Baker River Hydroelectric Project in the supports the project relicensing effort . The meeting provides a venue for the evaluation of upstream fish passage options and development a course of action.  Future meeting dates: March 5, Tuesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - downstream design at Sea-Tac March 6, Wednesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - upstream design at Sea-Tac April 2, Tuesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - downstream design at Sea-Tac April 3, Wednesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - upstream design at Sea-Tac May 6, Field Trip to Baker River to see studies May 7, Tuesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - downstream design at Sea-Tac May 8, Wednesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - upstream design at Sea-Tac June 4, Tuesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - downstream design at Sea-Tac June 5, Wednesday 9 a.m. - 3 p.m. - upstream design at Sea-Tac  1   ITEM Report on Completed Action Items: Mary Lou's Study Review: handout was given out.  DESCRIPTION Data collected at the project related to downstream fish migration study was distributed by Nick in a digital format. MWH will examine the data for correlation to natural and operation variables. They are also working on Upstream Tech Memo. It was suggested there might be value in marked groups, not including sockeye. MWH will complete analysis with a view to any seasonal FGE, however there is not time or money to do second study on a marked group The proposed schedule for in <ad>field biological studies were distributed for review. The schedule provided date of release, number and type of fish / tagging and release location. Near field - Early releases with 22 Coho during generation on and off, 12 fish released in gulper. Late group is Coho and sockeye, 22 at log boom with generation on & off 10 or so at log boom. At Fred's suggestion, Mary Lou moves 4/29/02, generation off, to one of the three evacuation weeks. Generation On is a five day, 24 hour period with transition period, Generation Off then 5 day period with transition. Transition necessity was questioned, but Mary Lou believes it is necessary. This study measures depth of fish with generation on & off. Study reduces variables. The effect of the b baffles is not a study goal, so they will remain fully open. Acoustic tag requires fish to be 120 ml long. Currently plan to use migrants, not hatchery fish, with the Coho being obtained at Little Park creek. Study should also include a release at the mouth of the gulper. Tag life in general is short, 12 to 15 days. Dates on study may change depending on best days for generation. Bob Barnes will determine the pool elevations to safely avoid a spill. Also need to include a detailed generation schedule. Ed worried about how the study and moving the sockeye around will effect their behavior. Draft report will be put out in September with progress reports along the way. Final work plan completed except transition period and dates. Far Field- Test assumes Far Field is not affected by generation being on or off. Will increase size of array at the log boom. Coho to be taken out of trap, not hatchery.  ACTION BY Data analysis ongoing <ad> MWH; Mary Louise. Marked groups set aside for future consideration. Need to finalize study dates and duration in order to integrate with PSE's operations. Nick requested a single page summary of the study plan, with a field trip to the site by consultants next Friday. Need any responses to study plan by early next week, 2/11/02)? Study prep March, study starts late April demobilize June, draft report Sept  2   PSE Replacement Fish Truck Specification Review List of Filter #1 Alternatives  Kelts Study- Hoping to find behavioral patterns. Will be followed for duration of study, tracking them through out. Steelhead still coming into adult trap will be brought up and need to be spawned before tagged. May want 30 fish for this study. Use 75% female, and expect 50% mortality. PIT Tags Study- Propose to perform a study using PIT tags in order to determine the efficiency of the trap and fish guide. To minimize stress, the fish will be tagged and released on same day, planning on tagging about 200 a day. Draft report due out in October. Additional comments on studies: Mary Lou will keep in touch while studies are going on, and will call in people if results are not what is expected.. Presented by Dave Eales and Ron Twiner. The bid specification for a replacement truck was distributed for review. This truck is viewed as replacement and a very much a safety issue. PSE plans to obtain bids from manufactures with proposed details, then after the bid is awarded, the manufacturer is to provide specific drawings and specs, which would be available for review by agencies. The truck will be virtually the same size, with a larger tank. Hopper will be heavy than it is now, which may run the risk of overloading the trucks. Stan wants us to go ahead with bid, and update agencies with the specs. Doug mentioned that on the maintenance side, it is much better to have new truck and new tanks. Mort reviewed format, which will be used in the rest of the process. It will contain background, description, design criteria, layout of the ladder and alternative's analysis based on discussions. Draft will be cleaned up, impute added, and sent out. U1.2 has a fixed pool. Don Schluter does not agree to decision at the previous upstream passage meeting to consider fish ladders as a fatally flawed alternative for upstream passage. He objects to the handling of the fish that other options entail and requires volitional passage. Gary asked Don to again review the documented concerns of fish ladders. Don stated that he believes the ladders could be built up the side of the dam, and does not see landslides, or previous failures of large ladders, as a reason to eliminate this alternative. Mort, Ed & Jim consider ladders of this size a detriment to the fish passage, with a high likelihood of harm to the fish. Don also believes some type of new technology would provide a means for ladder construction. It was pointed out that other options, such as a fish tram, are still being considered. As no agreement was  Arnie is to examine the need for a collection permit. and if required to submit an application. Have ready by Sockeye run, in May or June. Nick will continue to run specs by agencies  3   Review List of Filter #2 Alternatives Temperature Sampling Summary Project Schedule  reached on this issue Don and others agreed to discuss this issue at the Solution Team level. Locks, elevators and tramways alternatives were reviewed at the conceptual level, with examples of such facilities being presented. Elevators are designed for upstream passage; not downstream passage Pelton Round Butte Dam has tramway that is being studied. Sorting capabilities are more difficult with such a facility, however this option should not be listed as fatally flawed for this reason. Since existing examples of this type of facility are on smaller structures, scaling issues to the size of the Baker structures must be considered Temperature data at various locations at the Baker facility was distributed. This hourly data is summarized to daily averages and then compared to the adult trap to determine the amount of temperature differences between the trap and other release locations. Erroneous information is present due to dry temperature sensors. Since transport time is short, 45 minutes, so there is little temperature increase during transport. Jim suggested finding maximum temperature days and using these for a basis of comparison. Schedule now includes the study dates. Upstream resolution by middle 2003. Up and downstream are now moving along nicely, however overall schedule will require  New Action Items: <b7> Take a video of trap operation - Doug Bruland <b7> Consider placing this video and/or pictures of trap operation on website <b7> Ongoing resolution of temperature and flow study - Kim <b7> Sorting Adult Fish & number of containers needed <ad> Nick <b7> Email Upstream Passage Matrix - Kim March 6th Agenda <b7> Review notes <b7> Action Items <b7> Studies Schedule Refined <b7> Discussion on trams, elevators alternatives <b7> Project schedule <b7> Set agenda next meeting  4   5    2002fish20020204.pdf en 