BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes October 2, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 8538341. PRESENT Ann Dunphy and Ardis Bynum (USFS), Saul Weissberg, Don Burgess, and Tracie Johannesson (NCI), Paula Ogden-Muse and Tim Manns (NPS), Andy Hatfield and Dave Reid (PSE), Lyn Wiltse (facilitator) REMAINING RESOLVE SESSIONS • October 3 at USFS Building in Mountlake Terrace • October 24, 2003, in USFS Office in Sedro Wooley OCTOBER 2 AGENDA 1. Review Agenda 2. Review Revised Draft of Education PME • Go through each PME—are we okay with it? • What are the outstanding issues? • What are the interests? • What solutions satisfy the interests of all participants? 3. Outline Next Steps NEW ACTION ITEMS Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group, October 2, 2003 RESOLVE Session for Education Page 1 of 5   • • • • • • •  ALL: Reserve 10/21 from 1:00 to 3:00 for possible conference call re: re-wording this PME. ALL: Consider topics of level of need and scope (in preparation for 10/24 meeting). Andy: Send out the definition of 3-point scale describing priorities. Dave: Verify limits of PSE Corporate spending. Andy: By October 6, adapt PME to reflect today’s discussions and send out for comments. ALL: Respond to Andy re: re-wording of PME by October 14. Andy: By October 17, get back to folks with “finalized” PME and/or notification that the 10/21 conference call is on.  NOTES FROM RESOLVE MEETINGS To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE GROUNDRULES • Work at understanding one another. • Use airtime wisely. • Speak honestly and respectfully. • Examine assumptions. • Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. • One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 • Document our agreements. • Caucuses are okay. EDUCATION GOALS Mechanism to provide funding (over the term of the license) for (conservation) educational activities that:  1  •  Are diverse in terms of themes, approaches (multi-media and multi-temporal), constituents (all age groups and underserved and minorities)  •  Have nexus to the project •  Place based (within the Baker Watershed) and resource based  •  We recognize that the effects of this will also have broader (social, etc.) implications  •  Are flexible, adaptable, and appropriate over time, and are sustainable  •  Promote stewardship (broadly)  •  Supports existing programs and/or provides complementary programs  •  Are effective (meet goals and have measurable outcomes)  All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 2 of 5   •  Are cost effective  •  Include partnerships that are sustainable (this will help activities be sustainable)  This mechanism will include an oversight function (goals, fund distribution, methods to evaluate, etc.) This PME will be a component of the Recreation Management Plan. This plan will be complete within (at least) 2 years of license issuance. Interim funding will be available. We, as a shared resource group, should be able to ask the Rec. Subgroup and/or the BRCC for additional funding from its pool of money. TYPES OF EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES* * Consider context/part of curriculum, would include support/materials, etc. •  Educational multi media (websites, etc.)  •  “Stewardship” activities (one-on-one with folks in the Basin)  •  Day (indoor and outdoors)  •  Field trips (schools, sr. centers, general public)  •  Teacher workshops  •  Conferences  •  Curriculum development  •  Seminars (field based)  •  Outreach  BRCC BRCC will be an umbrella organization tasked with adaptively managing resources over the term on the new license. Each of the resource groups (including Recreation) will have a subgroup within the BRCC. We suggest an Education Subgroup of the Recreation Subgroup of the BRCC. Another alternative would be to have designated “education experts” attend the Recreation Subgroup meetings when topics of education are on the agenda. POTENTIAL MEMBERS OF EDUCATION SUBGROUP USFS, NPS, PSE, Local ESD, WSTA, NCI, Whatcom and Skagit Counties POTENTIAL CRITERIA FOR APPLICANTS •  Government Organizations  •  NGOs: 501C3 and 501C4  •  Favor partnerships and matching funds  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 3 of 5   •  Include multi-year programs (up to 3 years)  •  Existing programs could also apply for funding  Consider whether it would be appropriate to consider religious groups for funding. Dave will check to see if PSE is legally precluded from doing this. LIST OF PARTICIPANT INTERESTS The following list was developed by meeting participants at the start of this RESOLVE session. This list includes notes from the subsequent discussions. It should not be inferred that each of the interests below is necessarily shared by all participants. See list of Education Goals on page 2 to understand the shared interests that were derived from the list below: • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  Product is age-diverse, aimed at folks in the basin, choice, there needs to be an increase in I & E. Clear understanding of scope of educational offering. Programs that are place-based, resource-based, watershed-based, in and out of Project area, within Skagit Watershed Basin, non-conflicting (in terms of audience or funding). Sustaining existing programs. Enhancing/expanding programs (existing or new). Programs are supportive and complementary. Program needs to be adaptable to the future/long term commitments, responsive to changing needs – broad-based partnership. Funding needs to be available to qualified providers/programs (grant pool). Don’t harm existing programs or start new ones at their expense. Offer “stewardship” opportunities/activities to general public (the educated become the educators). Sustainable funding base for the activities and programs we agree on. Offer “best” possible programs (meet the needs of teachers, students, parents, etc.). Partner with agencies all the way through and explore synergies. Connections with existing programs. Address existing issues in the basin (acknowledge there is potentially a different standard between I & E. Work with partners toward accomplishing shared goals. Long-term and multi-dimensional relationship with users. Focus on providing learning opportunities to the local population (Mt. Vernon, Sedro-Woolley, King and Snohomish Counties). Serve underserved/unmet needs, provide outreach to minority groups and those who currently don’t attend such programs. Provide a variety of educational services (camping, over-night, day trips, etc.) Education program has direct connections to the Project (“nexus to the Project”). Express agency goals and values. Education is provided in a cost-effective manner. A chance to deliver a conservation (vs. preservation) type of message within the context of telling PSE’s story. Multi-media/multi-temporal approaches to accommodate diverse learning styles/cultures. “Extendable” lessons.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 4 of 5   1. Parking Lot •  Need to consider level of need, scope  •  Tie check on use/effectiveness of educational programs on future visitor surveys  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 5 of 5    2003recreational20031002.pdf en 