BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Wildlife and Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting July 17th, 2003 (8:30 a.m. - 2:00 p.m.) (Bring Sack Lunch) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-280-6429, code 144995# (Please tell Tony or Lyn (425-890-3613) if you plan to call into meeting)  AGENDA Review notes/revise agenda Update on RESOLVE process • New norms for discussions • Format for agreements Items to RESOLVE: • 1.3.4 – Bald Eagle Nest Management • 1.1.2 – Beneficial Vegetation in the Fluctuation Zone • 1.3.2 – Loon Nesting Platforms • 1.2.3 – Mountain Goats • 1.1.1 – Old Growth Forests • 1.4.1 – Plants of Special Status • 1.4.2 – Noxious Weed Management Evaluate meeting, set agenda for next meeting (August 8th)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Terrestrial Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes July 17, 2003 8:30 a.m. – 3:30 p.m. USFS Office—Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Don Gay (USFS), Gene Stagner (USFWS), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Laura Potash (USFS), Carl Corey (USFS), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation) Agenda • Review notes, agenda • RESOLVE update o Norms o Format • Check in on last meeting agreement—Osprey • Items to RESOLVE o 1.3.4—Bald Eagles o 1.1.2—Beneficial Vegetation o 1.3.2—Common Loons o 1.2.3—Mountain Goats o 1.1.3—Old Growth Forest o 1.4.1—Plants of Special Status Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 5   o 1.4.2—Noxious Weeds New Action Items • Tony—Review USFS Weeds Best Management Practices • Tony—button up with Laura re special plants cost estimate • Marty—write up PME’s as agreed today and send out to working group • Tony—in consultation with Gene and Laura, put together a preliminary scope and budget for beneficial plant in drawdown zone test—float to working group by e-mail—by 8/15. • Tony and Laura—talk to Kathy S. about FERC EA and noxious weed control • Don—make estimate for goat thing planning and implementation (by November) • Tony—Call September meeting with Marty, Carl, Laura and Laurel to finish discussing noxious weed PME. Old Action Items 1. Marty—sent to group the federal regulation site for the USFWS Five-Point Policy 2. Kathy—Re-wrote License Article X.X (PME 1.3.1 Osprey Nest Structures) 3. Gene—Sent to Kathy Smayda the info on a Snag Management Plan. Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules and Criteria Following are the original RESOLVE ground rules agreed to by the working group: • • • • • • •  Work at understanding one another. Use airtime wisely. Speak honestly and respectfully. Examine assumptions. Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 Document our agreements.  In addition to these, the group agreed to the following additional norms:  1  All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. The group also agreed that materials to be considered at the RESOLVE session would be sent out in advance, per regular working group rules, if group members were expected to attempt agreement on those materials. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 2 of 5   • • • •  Caucuses are okay For each PME, we will begin by identifying the goal and measurable objectives We will use the 5/7/03 PME’s, as updated, for our RESOLVE discussion. We will bring in useful information from an earlier draft, where it contains needed detail, and the language that Kathy S. has written, if we find it useful. After we have agreed to a PME, Marty will revise it to reflect our agreement. Only after that will draft settlement language be written.  Added Lists Through the course of the meeting, the group decided to keep two lists, one for items related to the Wildlife Management Plan and one for items that might be covered by the TERF Fund. Wildlife Management Plan Items • Annual report • Five-year report (for FERC) • Bald eagle management on project lands Covered by TERF • Annual budget for beneficial vegetation in drawdown zone 1.3.1—Osprey Nest Structures—Agreements were confirmed 1.3.4—Support the Development of Bald Eagle Nest Management Plans Goal: Protect bald eagle nest sites for the term of the new license Agreements • Tentative agreement with the following changes • Use Kathy’s language (Page 2 of Draft Article, dated 7/7/03), with edits • Current annual surveys will continue, add detail about surveys in plan • Add reporting o Informal (when nests noticed) o Annual (Wildlife Management Program report) o Five-year progress report (for FERC) o Update to land owners, annually • Note adaptive management • Do a Bald Eagle Nest Plan for land owned by PSE • Add a small conservation easement budget • Lauri handed out the WDFW Bald Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292) as referenced in the article. 1.1.2—Evaluate the Potential for Establishing Beneficial Vegetation in the Fluctuation Zones Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 3 of 5   Goal: Identify desirable plant species that can persist in the reservoir drawdown zone for a variety of beneficial uses. Agreements • Tentative agreement with scope left blank for now and using Kathy’s language, with edits • There may be “part 2” to this PME—If there are plants that work for a specified period, should have an annual budget to plant (from the TERF Fund) 1.3.2—Provide Floating Nest Platforms for Common Loons Goal: Provide suitable nesting sites for common loons. Agreements • Tentative agreement with the following • Add reporting (part of Wildlife Management Report) of the annual monitoring. • At 15-year point, use Carl’s/Marty’s version of Kathy’s language and establish annual budget which would limit the liability if nests are moved. Don suggests we make provisions for using the annual budget in a post-15 year with no loon nesting situation either to support placement of platforms elsewhere, or to go into a terrestrial fund. • Have one out of three nests available for off site placement if WDFW designates the place (Lauri suggests we say “in agreement with WDFW” instead). • Add adaptive management. 1.2.3—Provide Habitat for Mountain Goats Goal: Enhance Mountain Goat summer foraging habitat Agreements • Tentative agreement with the following clarification • PSE will fund 23% of cost of planning and environmental review up to X dollars • PSE will fund full treatment cost and initial monitoring of 194 acres up to X dollars 1.1.3—Old Growth Edge Effects Goal: Reduce predation on spotted owls and marbled murrelets (Gene noted this action would work for compliance with USFWS requirements in this area) Agreements • Tentative agreement with following clarifications • PSE will provide funding for pre-commercial thinning of 321 acres at $250/acre in 2003 dollars 1.4.1—Protect Plants of Special Status Goal: To protect plants of special status Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 4 of 5   Agreements: • Tentative agreement with the following clarifications • Under point # 5, replace verbiage in parenthesis (“This area will be specified in the 4e terms and conditions”) with “…not to exceed the areas encompassed by survey in 1, 2, 3 and 4 above”. • Draft plan within one year of effective date of Settlement Agreement signing. • Re “incidental finds” (point # 4, page 20 of 5/7 draft), within project boundaries and outside boundaries, if surveyed for rare plants during Relicense as # 1 and 2 above. 1.4.2—Develop and Implement a Noxious Weed Management Plan Goal: 1) Prevent the introduction of new noxious weeds in the Project area; 2) Control spread of existing or newly discovered Class A, B and C noxious weeds within the area affected by the Project; 3) Eradicate existing or newly discovered Class A and “B designate” weeds with in the area affected by the project, according to methods approved by USFS; and 4) Evaluate other invasive species periodically to determine if control and/or eradication is warranted. Agreements • Tony will call a special subgroup to complete tentative agreement on this PME (see Action items) • The group discussed preparing a draft plan within six months of filing the license. Agenda for August 8, 2003 • • • •  1.3.3—Provide habitat for riparian cavity dwellers 1.2.2—Provide spring foraging habitat for grizzly bears 1.2.5—Provide connectivity habitat for low mobility species 1.2.4—Provide breeding habitat for amphibians  The August 8, 2003, meeting will be held at the USFWS offices in Lacey, Washington.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group Page 5 of 5    2003terrestrial20030717.pdf en 