 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Working Group RESOLVE October 27, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Conference Room A (425-775-9702) 21905 64th Avenue West, Mountlake Terrace, WA AGENDA Conference Call Number: 1-800-582-8948, participant code: *0529465* 1. Review Agenda, Notes, Action Items 2. Brief Review of Prior Agreements/or Revisit Changes (from 10/16): Aquatic Habitat Restoration (3.4.4), Fluvial Geomorphic Management (3.4.1) 3. 3.3.1 Implement Flow Regime 4. 6.3 Reservoir Level Management 5. Other PME proposals (i.e. sockeye salmon enhancement -Walsh?) 6. Review draft agenda for next RESOLVE meeting (November 21) October 27, 2003 Driving Directions to US Forest Service Office: 1) Driving North from Seattle (or South from Everett) on I-5, take the 220th St. SW exit (exit 179). 2) Turn west (right if from southbound I-5, left if from northbound I-5) onto 220th St. SW. 3) Drive west about a block and turn right onto 64th Ave W. 4) The office building is about ¼ block down the street on the right side of the road. Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatics Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes October 27, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, PSE Written by: Dee Endelman, ADI Attendees Greta Movassaghi, USFS Stan Walsh, SSC Lorna Ellstad, Skagit County Scott Lentz, USFS (telephone) Phil Hilgert, R2 Consultants Ruth Mathews, TNC Cary Feldmann, PSE Arn Thoreen, SFEG Gene Stagner, USFWS (telephone) Dee Endelman, facilitator September 29 Agenda • Review agenda, notes, actions • Brief review/revisit changes o Aquatic Habitat (3.4.4) o Fluvial Geomorphic (3.4.1) • Flow Regime (3.3.1) • Reservoir Level Management (6.3) • Other PME Proposals (Sockeye Production) • Develop agenda for next meeting Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Aquatics Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 New Action Items 1. Cary—Check with Gene and Steve regarding 3.4.4 (Aquatic Habitat Restoration)—what are their consultation requirements and how do those change this PME? 2. Arnie—E-mail the group the results of Cary’s action item. 3. All—give Arnie feedback on 3.4.4 via e-mail. 4. Phil—Re Flow Regime (3.3.1), draft the first three columns of the matrix discussed today. 5. Greta—Send Arnie answers to bracketed questions in the Erosion Management PME (3.4.2) 6. Stan—Re-draft Sockeye Production PME to clarify the scope and stages of this PME and send it out via e-mail for comments. Old Action Items 1. Bob W.—Regarding 3.4.3 (Erosion Management), send language to Arnie for 3.4.3 a and b (page 64, 9/12 draft). Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules • Work at understanding one another. • Use airtime wisely. • Speak honestly and respectfully. • Examine assumptions. • Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. • One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 • Document our agreements. • Caucuses are okay. Review of PME’s Discussed To Date Note: In this meeting, we were working from 4rd draft PME’s dated October 16, 2003. In addition, there were handouts for new versions of 3.4.4, 3.4.1, 6.0 (Shared Resources) and Sockeye Production (new PME) 3.4.4: Aquatic Habitat Restoration 1 All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Aquatics Resources Working Group Page 2 of 5 • The fourth paragraph lacks some words. Get Cary to clarify the meaning (he did so later in the meeting.) • Regarding the “Plan” in paragraph 1 under “Description of Actions”, there will be emergent situations over time (e.g., opportunities to purchase land, changes in the river wrought by nature, etc.)—there may also be opportunities over the first 2 years (before the Plan is developed). • Is this a Plan that needs two year development? (It could take less time, although there is a lot to do in the first several years. If it did take less time, activities could start sooner). • How should we rank the prioritization? Should it be more biological or geographic? (The current draft attempts to balance both—it’s contained in the “Description of Actions” in the 3rd paragraph). • In the “Summary of Action”, replace “…restore fish habitat” with “…restore, protect and enhance aquatic habitat.” • Should we have two funds—one for in-basin and one for out of basin? • To satisfy Federal agency consultation requirements, we may need to have a list of actions contained in this PME. • The Baseline year needs to be decided. Is it 2006 or 2004? Is this a Policy Team decision? • The concept of this PME looks good. All will review it in more detail and send Arnie their input. 3.4.1: Fluvial Geomorphic Management • Add a note that the actions described in Paragraph 2 of the “Description of Actions” are a placeholder. • Once A-16 is further along, we should be able to be more specific regarding actions. We’ll be talking about A-16 further at the 11/13 working group meeting. • As a framework, this PME looks good. 3.3.1: Flow Regime • Can we look at regimes in terms of years given how weather changes around here in shorter spans? • Could we look at a combination of reservoir levels, snow pack and inflows? • Because we can’t predict weather patterns, we sometimes have to “fly by the seat of our pants”. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Aquatics Resources Working Group Page 3 of 5 How much can we plan for? • The answer may be a matrix that takes all flow factors into account. Phil sketched out the following matrix: Time Period Inflow Reservoir Snow pack Outflow January 16-July 15 Low Low Low Critical Low Medium Medium Medium Standard High High High Standard July 16-October 15 Low Low Low Critical Low Medium Medium Medium Standard High High High Standard October 16- Low Low Low Critical Low November 15 Medium Medium Medium Standard High High High Standard November 16- Low Low Low Critical Low January 15 Medium Medium Medium Standard High High High Standard • The time periods might be somewhat different than above. • We need to fill in numbers for the various factors. Once filled in, they could be used to help decision making regarding outflows. • This concept looks good. Phil will take a shot at filling in the first three columns and look at the time periods. 6.3: Reservoir Level Management • The basic language looks good at this point. • Clarify that the “worldwide web” could also be another form of mass communication (since technology will change over the license term). New PME: Sockeye Production • The current thinking of the tribes putting forth this PME is increasing production to between 800,000-1.2 million smolts, depending on the ability of the system to handle this increase. • Stan will revise the PME to clarify the scope and lay out the stages. For example, the first stage is a study to determine system limits. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Aquatics Resources Working Group Page 4 of 5 Agenda for November 21 RESOLVE Meeting Note: If the Agency people from Olympia cannot make the 11/21 meeting, the rest of the group will be consulted about canceling the session. The group may not wish to meet without Gary, Gene and Steve. • Flow Regime • Fluvial Geomorphic Management • WQ PME’s (following meeting with WDOE on 11/14 regarding these PME’s) • Sockeye Production • Habitat Restoration • Erosion Management Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Aquatics Resources Working Group Page 5 of 5  