BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreation Resources Working Group June 16, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. PSE Offices Mount Vernon, WA AGENDA Review Agenda Review of RESOLVE process Conversation about Project-Induced Recreation paper Break 2.1.1 Water Safety 2.1.2 Boating hazards 2.4.1 Create New Trails Lunch 2.5.4 Kulshan 2.5.7 ADA Compliance Meeting review <b7> Agreements reached <b7> Action plans Agenda for July RESOLVE session, confirm time and place Adjourn Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes June 16, 2003 9:00 a.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m. PSE Office, Mount Vernon, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 8538341. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Ardis Bynum (USFS), Susan Rosborough (NPS), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Dee Endelman (facilitator) June 16 Agenda <b7> Review agenda and ground rules <b7> Review RESOLVE process <b7> Project-induced recreation discussion <b7> 2.1.1--Water Safety <b7> 2.1.2--Boating Hazards <b7> 2.4.1--Create New Trails <b7> 2.5.4--Kulshan Campground <b7> 2.5.7--ADA Compliance <b7> Set agenda for 21, 2003 meeting New Actions Items 1. Dee: draft notes from this meeting--send to Andy for distribution Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 4   2. Andy--Tell Berger to draft license articles based on group agreements today 3. Andy--Make changes to PME's based on group agreements today. Send these out for confirmation. 4. Andy--Make sure that public access possibilities (for lands acquired as part of the Settlement Agreement) are included in "Access Management" section. 5. Andy--Take trail maps to Cultural group 6. Dee--Check with Ed Schild and Jon Vanderheyden regarding who will negotiate cost sharing issues. Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules and Criteria Dee suggested--and the group agreed to--the following groundrules: <b7> Work at understanding one another. <b7> Use airtime wisely. <b7> Speak honestly and respectfully. <b7> Examine assumptions. <b7> Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. <b7> One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 <b7> Document our agreements. Dee also suggested the following criteria to determine acceptable solutions to an issue under discussion: <b7> It (the solution) helps us meet our interests. <b7> It's legal. <b7> It doesn't create other problems. <b7> It is practical, do-able. The group did not specifically agree that these are the criteria that will be used. Accordingly, we should revisit these before we do brainstorming on major issues. 2.1.1--Water Safety Agreements 1. Combine 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 (Boating Hazards) 2. Develop a Water Safety Plan after the Settlement Agreement. 1 All agreements are tentative even after the "one meeting review rule". However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   3. The Description of Actions contained in 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 provides a guide for plan elements. 4. Change the last Description of Actions (in 2.1.1) "...to selected hazards" 5. Use the Display Guide (see # 7 below) developed by this group. 6. Develop site specific perimeters for snag removal, once we have lake levels. 7. Displays: a. Large ones where there are major boat launches and visitors' sites; b. Have tear maps at visitors' centers and drop boxes at major boat launches or stapled at dispersed sites; c. Once we've decided on dispersed sites, we can determine where other displays should be; d. Have channel markers for Shannon Narrows. 2.4.1--Create New Trails Issue: When to build new trails? Agreements 1. Change the first "Description of Action" to the following: "Create a comprehensive trail development plan to include potential routes of East Lake Shannon Trail and Baker West Bank Lake Trail. Include scope and schedule for each. In the twelfth year, the plan will be reviewed. As a result of this or subsequent reviews, PSE will provide a maximum of X additional miles of trail, based on identified need." 2. The maximum miles of trail will be no more than the total number of miles included in the R15 Recreational Trail Routing map less the proposed trail section extending from Park Creek Campground north up the Swift Creek drainage. 2.5.4--Provide Improvements to Kulshan Campground Issue: How does Kulshan fit into the bigger suite of recreation opportunities? The group is in tentative agreement on this PME. We will review it once we have the whole "package" put together to answer the issue identified above. 2.5.7--Provide and Fund ADA Compliance Issue: How should costs be shared? (Note: Dee will call Ed Schild and John Vanderheyden regarding this issue. Who will negotiate it?) Issue: Need for ADA Compliance--does the current PME say that? 1. To resolve this issue, the group agreed to the following wording for the Summary of Action (to replace the current Summary of Action): "Within two years of issuance of a new license, PSE will develop and implement a transition plan to comply with current ADA direction at sites associated with the project. The plan will include funding and implementation of specific measures on a site-by-site basis." Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group   2. The group agreed that only one "Description of Action" would remain, i.e., the construction of an ADA-accessible fishing platform on Depression Lake. All other descriptions are subsumed into the general statement regarding the need for an ADA transition plan. RESOLVE Agenda for July 21, 2003 Meeting <b7> Review June agreements, if needed <b7> 2.1.3--Law Enforcement <b7> 2.4.2--Maintain Trails <b7> 2.5.6--Wildlife Observation Facility <b7> 6.4--Access Management <b7> 6/5--Informational, Interpretive and Educational Services and Facilities Other Agreements "Lake bed movement"--include this as a possibility under "developed camping" section (and maybe under "dispersed camping", depending on the management plan). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group    2003recreational20030616.pdf en 