 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group June 23, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 AGENDA 1. Review notes / agenda / action items 2. Review Studies in detail: R11 / 15 R12 3. Hydrops update 4. R5 update 5. General discussion of Components of Recreation Management plan 6. Need for additional summer fieldwork? 7. Lake Shannon development feasibility BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group June 23, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:30 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA 98273 FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternative solutions and recommendations addressing recreation, education and aesthetic resources related to the Baker River Project and its operations leading to a settlement agreement.” Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Chris Lawson (Huckell/Weinman Associates, Inc.), Ann Dunphy, on phone and Ardis Bynum (US Forest Service), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council ), Cary Feldmann and Andy Hatfield (Puget Sound Energy ), Lauri Vigue (Washington Dept. Fish & Wildlife), Susan Rosenbrough (National Parks), facilitator, Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Deb McFarlane, notetaker (PDSA Consulting). 2003 SCHEDULE NOTE: JULY 28TH MEETING HAS BEEN RESCHEDULED TO AUGUST 7, 2003. July 21 (RESOLVE 9am-3pm), Aug 5th (Baker field trip), Aug 7, (RESOLVE 9am-3pm), Aug. 25, Sept.22, Oct. 27, Nov.17 (third Monday), December 15 (third Monday). Assume we are meeting at the Forest Service Office in Mountlake Terrace from 9:00 to 2:30 unless otherwise specified. CONFERENCE CALL LINE: ALL WERE REMINDED, TO CALL IN ON THE CONFERENCE CALL LINE WHEN UNABLE TO ATTEND IN PERSON: 1-866-280-6429 AND ENTER PARTICIPANT CODE: 144995 #. Baker River Project Relicense 6-23-03 Meeting FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 23, 2003 Agenda USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00am to 2:30pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items • Connie’s Letter and accompanying PDEA Section for Recreation 2. Review Comments on Studies: • R 11/15 (Capacity Suitability Analysis) • R 12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) 3. HYDROPS/NAVD Update 4. Debrief of RESOLVE Session on 6/16 5. Update in R5 (Aesthetics Study Request) 6. General discussion of Components of Recreation Management plan 7. Need for additional Summer Field Work 8. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility 9. Set Agenda for August 7, 2003 10. Evaluate Meeting New Actions Items • All: Send comments to Andy on R-13 (Recreational Visitors Survey), R-16 (Recreation Needs Analysis), and R-9 (Electronic Monitoring) by 6/30/03. • Andy: Call Saul Weisberg re: 6.5 of Proposed draft action by 6/27/03. • Andy: Discuss dispersed recreation attributes with cross resource Working Group by summer 2003. • Lyn: Discuss virtual cross resource Working Groups with team leaders (check composition, balance, etc.) by 6/27/03. • Andy, Ann, and Brian: Meet to hammer out a study plan using ideas from May 19th meeting, by 6/30/03. • Andy: Revise study plan for the meeting above by 6/30/03. • Ann: Send Andy comments on Aesthetics study and R11/15 (Recreation Capacity and Suitability Analysis) by 6/23/03. • Andy: Send absent folks hard copies of PSE’s input to Louis-Berger Group for fall version of PDEA by 6/24/03. • Andy: Check with Carol, of the Louis-Berger Group, to see if it’s too late to include what was agreed to at the June 16th RESOLVE session. • Cary: Check with Rob, of the Louis-Berger Group, to see why they needed percentages and dollars to things not agreed to. Also find out why they are doing the economics analysis at this point for the PDEA (pending collaboration and resolution amongst the parties). • Andy: Send out June 16 RESOLVE meeting notes by June 24, 2003. • Chris: Incorporate comments into next versions of draft reports by July 14, 2003 if possible. • Andy: Button up with Brian and Jim regarding comments on draft reports (R11/15, etc.) • Andy: Set up teamlet conference with Ann, Ardis, Chris and possibly Tony (?), to define R12 database queries. • Lauri: Check with Tom Hamer re: additional dispersed sites found by Hamer Environmental during wetland inventory and button up with Andy. Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 2 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group • Ann: Give additional information re: dispersed sites (missing and mis-located) to Chris. • Chris: Once folks are confident in the accuracy of the database (R12) lock up the fields. • Andy: Send out CD’s with locked R12 database tied to GIS to team members by 6/30/03. • Chris: Check with Joetta to ensure that all GIS maps are using the 1988 datum. • Andy: Send out updated reservoir updated level maps to all (NAVD). • Andy: Expand PME #2.1 to include Boating Management Plan. • Lauri: Send Andy a copy of outline of Lewis Rivers Recreation Management Plan. • Ardis: Send outline of other Recreation Management Plan to Andy. • Andy: Put together draft outline of Recreation Management Plan including Shannon vs. Baker and PMEs by 8/7/03. • Andy: Talk with Jim re: trail field trip (prior to 8/7 meeting). Report on Old Actions Items • Andy: Sent out cultural flow charts to group by 5/26/03. • Andy: Discussed dispersed recreation attributes with team leads on 5/23/03. • Andy: Sent Ann PowerPoint handouts from 5/14/03 workshop. • Andy: Checked on availability of Mount Vernon for June RESOLVE session. • Andy: Reviewed Aesthetic study examples given by Ann. • Ann: Got USFS input on current study plan by 5/23/03. ***ANDY, PLEASE FILL IN A BRIEF UPDATE FOR EACH OF THESE IN THE TABLE BELOW SO IT WILL BE EASY FOR US TO TRACK PROGRESS GOING FORWARD. THANKS!!!*** STUDIES UPDATE Study # Title Notes/Next Steps R-R5 Visuals and Aesthetics Study It is a requirement of the license to conduct this study. The Request USFS has expressed concern re: the limited scope of this study. Next Steps: We will include feedback from Ann to incorporate Forest Service interests. Andy has brought EDAW on board to assist with conducting this study. Andy will be giving Mark Greenig a site tour on 6/25. We will get an update on this at our next meeting. R-7 Recreation Use Survey – Ongoing. Literature Review R-9 Recreation Use Survey – The draft study report is out for review/comment. Electronic Monitoring R-11/15 Recreation Capacity and The draft study report is out for review/comment. Suitability Analysis The question was raised re: how the data in this report would be used and if it would be altered as additional data from other studies come in. There will be a need to button up with Working Group folks before actually firming up plans relative to specific sites where there may be constraints across other resources. This should be treated as a conceptual level report. On the slope map, as well as, on the Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 3 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group ecologically sensitive map, Ann said there where some errors that might make the composite map faulty. She sees a need to discuss real issues rather than allowing them to get lost in layers of maps. It is not clear how this study relates to the Needs Analysis. The Needs Analysis is setup to identify what actions should be taken and the objective of this study was to specify where these actions should take place. The need to take trails – based actions comes from outside this study (through the IAC and the SCORP and well as documented in the Needs Analysis). This study discusses the best places for these actions to take place. There has also been a discussion about changing some trails (e.g., not maintaining Swift Creek and relocating Boulder Creek). Most of the trail plans include connecting existing sites/places of interest near the reservoir. It was also suggested that this report point to the Needs Analysis, since that is where projections into the future (over the term of the license) will be addressed. R-12 Dispersed Site Inventory The draft study report is out for review/comment. Chris has begun to tie the database for this study to the various GIS layers to facilitate site-specific analysis (e.g. sites in the drawdown zone vs. on the shore, etc.). It is also possible to query specific attributes of each site (“packets”). Andy pointed out that there were no Terrestrial Biologists assisting with the data collection for this study. We agreed to setup a teamlet conference call to come up with some specific database queries to run. Some queries will be site specific others will be for clusters. There was a question about whether additional dispersed sites identified by Hamer Environmental during their wetland inventory had to be included. Lauri will follow up. R-13 Recreation Visitor Surveys The draft study report is out for review/comment. R-14 Secondary Data Collection Ongoing. R-16 Recreation Needs Analysis The draft study report is out for review/comment. PDEA UPDATE Andy distributed hard copies of the input PSE gave the Louis -Berger Group by their June 2nd deadline to be used as input for the fall version of the PDEA. Connie Freeland’s cover letter made clear that this input did not necessarily include collaborative decisions made by all the Working Groups. PSE was forced to give their best guess in many instances. The Forest Service questioned and objected to the inclusion of specific percentages for items where cost share had only been agreed upon in concept at the point in the process. HYDROPS UPDATE/NAVD CONVERSION Tony’s report to the Terrestrial Working Group was read. It reported that the TST came up with a Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 4 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group preliminary ranking of soft constraints for the HYDROPS model. All resource interests were taken into consideration in coming up with this ranking. There is now an updated reservoir management scenario in the draft actions being included in the fall version of the PDEA. The TST meets again 6/27. Stay tuned for updates re: HYDROPS being able to operate in probabilistic as well as deterministic mode. PSE is in the midst of performing some rigorous QA testing. Andy will send out an updated table showing Upper and lower Baker Dam elevations and storage volumes, as per the NAVD (North American Vertical Datum) conversion. We discussed how converting to the 1988 datum will influence our data/maps. This involves “raising” the reservoir level 3.77’ at Upper Baker and 3.75’ at Lower Baker. 6/16/03 RESOLVE Session Andy reported that this initial RESOLVE Session went swimmingly well! They combined water safety and boating hazards together. They agreed on types of actions to be taken at all developed and high-use dispersed sites. The details will be developed in a Management Plan. They also discussed new trail creation. They are looking seriously at the trail segments that were proposed in the PME. They also agreed to re-evaluate trail needs every 12 years. They had some questions about walker/hiker accessibility (ADA compliance). They discussed how to deal with the conflict between bikers and horse-ers. There is interest in managing some of Upper Baker Lake as low wake/low noise. This would need to be worked through the Counties in the form of a boating Management Plan. This plan could include boater’s safety, erosion etc., taking into consideration other resource concerns. The next RESOLVE meeting will be July 21. PROJECT INDUCED RECREATION The paper that was distributed on this in hard copy to the Terrestrial Working Group has been officially withdrawn by PSE. DISCUSSION OF COMPONENTS OF RECREATION MANAGEMENT PLAN Andy will bring a draft outline to our next meeting. This outline will include input from Ardis and Lauri, and our PMEs. ADDITIONAL SUMMER FIELDWORK: Over Memorial Day weekend, Andy took a second set of developed site day use observations (at the boat ramps). He started at Shannon Creek and worked south. This was on Saturday, when the weather was nice and the toilets were clean at the resort. The Kulshan Campground day use areas were (by far) the most congested. Folks were launching at all boat ramps. As we review the R12 Dispersed Campsite database runs, we may need to do additional ground-truthing to confirm the data. At the 6/16 PME session opportunities for additional field work were identified for. We have tentatively schedule a site field trip for August 5th: • Roaded dispersed sites • Hazard setup assessment • Walking/flagging trial routes Note: It would be good to invite other resource folks on these field trips. Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 5 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group LAKE SHANNON DEVELOPMENT FEASIBILTY We currently lack legal access to the existing campground at Lake Shannon. The PME calls for providing boat launching, day use, and overnight camping at this location or at another suitable lakefront site. Brian has expressed that it was in the County’s interest to provide this on Lake Shannon. Andy called Jamie Van De Vander (a landscape consultant) to prepare a feasibility analysis of possible alternate locations. These locations include: • Bear Creek (boating hazard issues, owned by Glaciers/Crown Pacific) • 3 Mile Creek (access issues and 7% gradient, owned by DNR) • Current site - owned by PSE with access across Glacier property. Glacier intents on reopening their limestone quarry near that site. Jamie will be putting together a feasibility analysis for all 3 of these road access sites. We will review high-level site plans for these sites this fall. If road access is not possible, we may look at lake access only. HANDOUTS • Recreation Draft Actions – PDEA and accompanying cover letter from Connie Freeland, dated June 10, 2003 PARKING LOT • Presentation of National Forest Plan • Land Management • Forest Service presentation of SMS • Hold periodic "outreach" meetings for feedback from other groups (hiking, horseback riding, etc.) • Field trip - summer 2003? • Review USFS Roads Analysis Report - 2003 STUDIES SUMMARY FOR SOLUTION TEAM • R-11/15 (Recreation Capacity and Suitability Analysis), R-9 (Recreation Use Survey – Electronic Monitoring), R-13 (Recreation Visitor Surveys), R-12 (Dispersed Site Inventory), and R-16 (Recreation Needs Analysis) are all out for comment/reviews. • Moving ahead with R-R5 (Visuals and Aesthetics Study) request. EVALUATION OF MEETING Things Done Well • Welcome Lyn back • Ann by phone (even when ill!!!) • New terms Need for Improvement • Would appreciate de-caf coffee • Missed Jim and Brian Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 6 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group What's Hot? • PDEA package specifics (vs. generalities) TENTATIVE AGENDA ****NOTE: rescheduled from July 28, 2003**** August 7, 2003 Agenda USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 9:00am to 2:30pm NOTE: BRING LUNCH: BE PREPARED TO WORK THROUGH 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. Review Studies in detail: • R9 (Recreation Use Survey – Electronic Monitoring) • R11/R15 (Recreation Capacity and Suitability Analysis) • R12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) • R13 (Recreation Visitor Surveys) • R16 (Recreation Needs Analysis) 3. HYDROPS Update 4. Debrief of 6/21 RESOLVE Session 5. Update on R5-5 (Visuals and Aesthetics Study) 6. Review of draft outline of Recreational Management Plan 7. Need for Additional Summer Field Work? 8. Lake Shannon Development Feasibility Update 9. Set Aug. 25, 2003 Agenda 10. Evaluate Meeting Baker River Project Relicense, June 23rd, 2003 Meeting 7 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lyn Wiltse for Recreation Resources Working Group  