 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes October 3, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Ardis Bynum (USFS), Susan Rosebrough (NPS), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Dave Reed (PSE), Cary Feldmann, Dee Endelman (facilitator) October 3 Agenda 1. Review agenda, notes and action items 2. Review of Jon’s and Ed’s funding discussion 3. Continue the walk through of PME’s 4. Education PME: next steps 5. Agenda for 10/24 New Action Items 1. Ann—re-write trigger language in 2.5.1 (Bayview) to reflect USFS interest in timing certainty. 2. Andy—incorporate re-writes from today, send out to whole group by 10/15. 3. Ann and Andy—Re, 2.5.7 (Wildlife Observation), calculate distances for each type of loop, cost out. 4. Cary—Send HERC language to Andy (and he’ll send it out to group by 10/15). 5. Ann and Andy—Discuss Interpretive PME and draft language changes for packet Andy will send Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 4 to group by 10/15. 6. Andy—Do a draft implementation schedule by 10/15. Old Action Items: Note—we did not review action items at the meeting. Accordingly, some of the following may already be completed. 1. Ann and Andy—Button up regarding changes to 8/11/03 notes. 2. Andy—Check in with Jim E. re grant leveraging workshop timing—can we make it happen this fall? If not, are there alternatives to get the information? 3. Andy—Contact WTA/VOW to discuss how volunteer programs work/what we can leverage with these groups. 4. Ann—Send Andy the “meaningful measures” for cleaning dispersed and developed recreation areas for inclusion in 2.2.1. 5. Ann—Give Andy the number of miles on Rainbow Ridge Trail. 6. Jim—Get IAC grant supervisor to put together a workshop on grant requirements/trail creation and general policies—report to group on date at next meeting. 7. Andy—Check on tribal enforcement policies (for 2.1.3—Law Enforcement) 8. Andy—Talk to Greg Ball, WTA, re their volunteer program for trail maintenance. 9. Andy—Talk to VOW re trail maintenance. 10. Jim—Get Lewis River language re access management intent language at next meeting or e-mail before. Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules • Work at understanding one another. • Use airtime wisely. • Speak honestly and respectfully. • Examine assumptions. • Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. • One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 • Document our agreements. • Caucuses are okay. 2.5.1: Bayview Campground 1 All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 2 of 4 • Re 60% trigger, USFS (Ann) will put together some language to address USFS interest in timing certainty (e.g., “within the first 10 years”) • Cross out “Lake Shannon” under trigger section in addition to other campgrounds crossed out in our prior meeting (in case we reinstitute trigger section) 2.5.2: Fund USFS Campgrounds • Re O & M costs, clarify language to make sure it meets our intentions: o Goal is to bring campgrounds up to standards (based on “meaningful measures”) and maintain them; o Annual costs o Replacement costs o Administration o Minus offsetting revenues (i.e., net costs) 2.5.3: Access to Lake Shannon • Add that, in the event campground can’t be built, that this situation will be reviewed periodically by the BRCC • Clarify that campground fees will go back into operating the campground 2.5.4: Kulshan • Add a bullet saying that we’ll explore diverse accommodations for visitors (e.g., yerts) 2.5.5: Baker Lake Resort • In Recreation Plan and Implementation Schedule, we need to speak to annual license for Resort to make it mesh with other campground plans so that we integrate an array of services and amenities • Under the water well bullet, add “…with replacement water lines”. • The Recreation Plan should include exploration of boat dock in the Basin. • Add a bullet to reconfigure the resort for more space 2.5.6: Wildlife Observation • Change timing from “will be concurrent” to “may be concurrent and integrate with…” • Describe the type of facility we want for costing purposes—we may end up with an amount of money rather than a design for settlement purposes • Description of what we want is contained in the Scope Example plus: o Length—2 miles o ADA loop—1/2 mile (1/2 paved and ½ boardwalk—reference appropriate USFS standards) o No more than 2 bridges o Should serve for self-interpretive purposes and education Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 3 of 4 o Need to calculate distances and cost out (see Action Items) 2.5.7: ADA • Looks okay 2.6.1: RAM Fund • Group will review HERC Fund language and, at its next RESOLVE session, discuss how it applies to the RAM Fund 6.4: Access Management • Pave approximately one-mile section of road between Baker Lake Highway and Dam • Under “who’s involved” section: Delete the first sentence. Clarify the second (PSE will assist USFS, other landowners and agencies 6.5.1: Visitor Information • Change “shelter” to “visitor information station” throughout this PME • Change “Kulshan” to “site agreeable to PSE and USFS…may be forest service boundary…” • Clarify that portal may be staffed. Agenda for 10/24/03 • Education PME • RAM Fund • PME timeline • Review of 10/15/03 PME package Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 4 of 4  