BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group May 13, 2003 10:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. Baker River Lodge Concrete, WA  AGENDA TOLL free conference number - To Call into Meetings  Step 1 -Dial 1-866-280-6429 Step 2 -Dial Participant code 144995 then press #  *** • 10:00 -12:00 - Presentation on Historic Resource Study by HRA • 12:00 -1:00 Lunch • 1:00 - 4:00 - CHRWG Meeting 1. Introductions 2. Review Minutes/Agenda 3. Action Items 4. Questions and Answers/FERC – FERC Relicensing timeline 5. PDEA Status re: Cultural Resources TCPs Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) • UDP PMEs/March Workshop Erosion Control study Archaeology & TCP Presentations 6. Set June 10 Agenda 7. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   Distribution List Baker River Cultural/Historical Resources Working Group Organization  Name  Email  National Park Service Equinox Research & Consulting US Forest Service Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Puget Sound Energy US Forest Service Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe National Park Service Northwest Archaeological Associates Puget Sound Energy Upper Skagit Indian Tribe WA Dept. Natural Resources WA Office Archaeology & Historic Preservation PDSA Consulting Federal Energy Regulatory Commission  Ryan Booth Kelly Bush Ardis Bynum Larry Campbell Connie Freeland Jan Hollenbeck Jason Joseph Norma Joseph Bob Mierendorf Christian Miss Jessie Piper Scott Schuyler Lee Stilson Rob Whitlam  Ryan_Booth@nps.gov Kelrbush@earthlink.net abynum@fs.fed.us lcampbell@swinomish.nsn.us connie.freeland@pse.com jhollenbeck@fs.fed.us; sauk@sauk-suiattle.com njoseph@sauk-suiattle.com bob_mierendorf@nps.gov cjmiss@northwestarch.com jessie.piper@pse.com sschuyler@upperskagit.com lee.stilson@wadnr.gov robw@cted.wa.gov  Lyn Wiltse Frank Winchell  lyn@pdsaconsulting.com frank.winchell@ferc.gov  Distribution List Baker River Cultural/Historical Resources Interested Parties* Organization  Name  Email  Concrete Heritage Museum  John Boggs  jboggswash@aol.com  Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Skagit County Historical Museum National Park Service US Forest Service Skagit System Cooperative Louis Berger Associates  Ernie DeCoteau Martin Loesch Charlie O'Hara Karen Marshall Susan Rosebrough Jon Vanderheyden Stan Walsh Pat Weslowski  mloesch@swinomish.nsn.us; cohara@swinomish.nsn.us karenm@co.skagit.wa.us susan_rosebrough@nps.gov jvanderheyden@fs.fed.us; swalsh@skagitcoop.org weslowski@louisberger.com  police@sauk-suiattle.com  * Non-confidential communications only (Meeting Agenda and Meeting Notes, announcements, etc.)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group May 13, 2003 10:00 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. Baker Lake Lodge  FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jessie.piper@pse.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper, Connie Freeland, Doug Bruland, Jason Schmidt (Puget Sound Energy), John Boggs (Concrete Museum Association), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Pat Weslowski (Louis Berger Group), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research), Scott Schuyler and Cliff Edwards (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Ronald Kent (USACE), Rob Whitlam (WA Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation) on phone, Mary Jean Bullock, notetaker and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting Inc.) 2003 MEETING DATES NOTE: The June and July Working Group meetings have been suspended to allow time for technical teamlets to meet to draft the HPMP. This draft will be sent out the end of July for Working Group member review and will be finalized at the August 12 meeting. August 12, September 9, October 14, November 18 (third Tuesday), December 9, 2003. All meetings will be at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon unless otherwise specified. The next CROSS RESOURCE WORKSHOP MEETING will be MAY 14, 8:00 – 5:00 at the EMBASSY SUITES in LYNNWOOD. Presenter: Bob All regular attendees are encouraged to let Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting. Agenda for May 13, 2003, 1:00-4:00 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1   PSE Baker Lake Lodge 1. Introductions 2. Review Minutes/Agenda 3. Action Items 4. Updates: PDEA Status re: Cultural Resources TCPs Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) Outline • UDP PMEs/May Workshop Erosion control study Archaeology and TCP Presentations 6. Set August 12, 2003 Agenda 7. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • Jessie: Cancel June and July room reservations at PSE Office in Mt. Vernon. • Jessie: Check again with property owners of properties with towers on the East and West sides of Lake Shannon. • ALL: Let Kelly know if you want an electronic version of the ethnographic database. • ALL: Send additional comments/questions on Historic Resources Draft Report to Jessie ASAP. • Frank: Clarify who will be signatories vs. concurring parties on the Programmatic Agreement. • Jan and Jessie: By the end of May, draft a protocol for reviewing other Working Group’s PMEs. TCPs may be involved. • Kelly: Get info to Pat - ethnographic database and the area included (TCPs). • Jessie: Meet with Chris and Kelly to develop plan for fleshing out HPMP. • Jessie: Send notice to tribes that Historic Resources report is out for review. Highlight the four themes identified by HRA. • Scott: Pull together list of tribal issues associated with PMEs (to present at August meeting). REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Kelly: Sent ethnographic table of contents to Jessie, Chris and Jan to review. • ALL: Let Lyn know if you are interested in joining the HYDROPS teamlet (the “Technical Scenarios Teamlet” AKA the TST). Their first meeting was an April 9 conference call from 1:00 to 3:00. They have been meeting twice a week to make sure the models are performing as expected. They are also creating run request forms and sample output formats. In addition to serving as a clearinghouse for the model runs requested by the various working groups, they will provide analysis and perhaps suggest additional runs as a result of the runs requested by the different working groups. • Kelly: Discussed CRMP (HPMP) approach with Tribes. • Kelly: Brought the updated database for ethnographic archive (this will be addressed in our HPMP). • Chris: Sent Jessie the edited version of the HPMP outline so she could distribute it to working group members.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2   • • • • • • • •  ALL: Reviewed second draft of HPMP outline and gave any additional feedback to Jessie by April 25. Jan: Sent to Jessie a list of types of actions that have minimal or no effect on cultural resources, so Jessie can scan it and send out for Working Group members to review. Jan and Rod: Discussed process for handling requests for review of proposed actions from other working groups and was ready to discuss at our May meeting. Jessie, Chris, Kelly: Met April 14 to draft second draft proposed actions and sent it out for Working Group review by April 18. ALL: Reviewed second draft actions and got feedback to Jessie by April 28. Jessie: Sent out summary of feedback by April 30. ALL: Got Jessie feedback on the Erosion Study by April 25. Jessie reported that this study report has not yet been finalized by the Aquatics Working Group so it is not too late to get your comments in. ALL: Reviewed Historic Resources Draft Report. Sent burning questions to Jessie by end of month; otherwise were ready to discuss at our May 13th meeting.  FERC RELICENSING TIMELINE FOR CULTURAL TASKS Jessie reported that there were no changes since last time. PDEA STATUS RE: CULTURAL RESOURCES The preliminary partial PDEA was distributed May 1 to Solution Team members for review. It includes much of the information from the Initial Consultation Document (ICD). It deals mainly with the affected environment. A draft of the next PDEA will be out for Working Group review in early August. PSE will send out the next draft the end of September for public review. Comments will be due January 1, 2004. FERC has announced that they won’t be granting extensions. By April 30, 2004, we will turn in: • License Application • Settlement Agreement • PDEA TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTIES Kelly reports that the discussions with the tribes are ongoing. Chris and Ken gave an archaeological presentation for the Upper Skagit tribe and Kelly reviewed the TCP study process. Scott expressed appreciation on behalf of the tribe to PSE for Chris and Kelly’s presentations, time and attention. Archaeology and TCP presentations are being set up with the other two tribes. PMES/MAY WORKSHOP Red-line edited versions of the Second Draft PMEs were sent out on May 1. Jessie distributed cleaned up versions of the document. We reviewed the list. We want to be clear about how all the different groups/committees listed interact (see diagram sent by Jessie in April 21 email). We will add the Mt. Baker/Snoqualmie Forest Service to the list of parties BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 3   consulted. A question was raised about whether the Forest Service would be a signatory to the Programmatic Agreement. We assigned resolution of this question to Frank. SHARED RESOURCE PMEs We will take a close look at how cultural resources are represented in the education and outreach PME which is under the heading of Shared Resource PMEs. Connie distributed this section for our review. On page 84, we suggest removing “educational,” so as not to be limiting, and to list the three tribes. We might also consider how to enhance the Baker Lake Lodge, since it was not built to perform as an educational facility. A question was raised about where the HPMP education fund and the Shared Resource education fund and the BRCC all sort out. We will clarify this in the next version of PMEs. We appreciate Bob presenting this Working Group’s PMEs in the context of: • Change • Status • Focus Thanks Bob! HISTORIC PROPERTIES MANAGEMENT PLAN (HPMP) OUTLINE We plan to turn in our draft HPMP in early September. We will need to consider the timing of implementation (e.g., “upon issuance of license,” “within one year of acceptance of license,” etc.) Timeline – The designated teamlets (see below) are responsible for drafting the specified sections of the HPMP by July 29. This will give Working Group members two weeks to review it before the August meeting, where the draft will be approved. 1. Introduction – Chris will handle 2. Regulatory Setting - Chris will handle 3.1 Inventory and Evaluation APE – Chris 3.2 Archaeological Investigation – Chris, Jan on evaluation piece 3.3 Historical Investigations – HRA, Jan on evaluation piece 3.4 TCPs –Kelly, Jan on evaluation piece 4. Assessment of Effects - Kelly, Chris, Jessie, (input from Jan) 5.1.1 Historic Properties – Archaeological – Chris, (input from Jan) 5.1.2 Historic Properties – Historic – HRA, (input from Jan) 5.1.3 Historic Properties – TCPs – Kelly, (input from Jan) 5.2 Cultural Resources that currently do not meet Historic Register criteria – Tribes, John, Kelly, (input from Jan) 5.3 Policies and Programs – Chris, Jessie, Jan, Kelly, Patrick 6. Implementation – Chris, Jessie, Kelly, Patrick (input from Jan) Note: In the HPMP, we have a place holder for a protocol to deal with cross-resource conflicts.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 4   HANDOUTS • Draft HPMP Outline PARKING LOT • “How do we address upland areas?” (importance of mountain goats) • Develop “Area of Potential Effects” Map • Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups In progress • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Develop TCP (Traditional Cultural Properties) studies • Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? • Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees/Availability of downed cedar for tribal use • Determine criteria for “livingness” of APE Will address in HPMP. • HYDROPS demo • How to handle timing/schedule for implementing HPMP MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Great location – good meeting place • Nice food • Like shorter lunch • Diversity of participants • Great to have Patrick and Connie (HRA) here! (morning presentation) • Thankful for technical expertise • Happy to have Rob on phone • Welcome Ron (USACE)! • Moving to virtual meetings for June, July – small teamlets • We appreciate everybody! • Mary Jean’s service Change for Next Time • Work through lunch What’s Hot? • HPMP deadlines • PDEA schedule Studies Status for Solution Team • Archaeology Draft Report is out! • Historic Resources Draft Report out! • This report is releasable as it doesn’t appear to include any confidential information TENTATIVE Agenda for August 12, 2003, 11:00-4:00 p.m. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 5   PSE Office Building, Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review Minutes/Agenda 3. Action Items 4. FERC Relicensing Timeline 5. PDEA Status 6. Studies 7. Final review of HPMP draft 8. Set September 9, 2003 Agenda 9. Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5-13-03 MEETING Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 6   Baker River Historic Resource Survey Presentation by Historical Research Associates (HRA) May 13, 2003 - Baker Lodge  PRESENT: Jessie Piper, Connie Freeland, Doug Bruland, Jason Schmidt (Puget Sound Energy), John Boggs (Concrete Museum Association), Connie Walker-Gray and Patrick O’Bannon (Historical Research Associates), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Pat Weslowski (Louis Berger Group), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Ronald Kent, archaeologist, (USACE), Rob Whitlam (WA Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation) on phone, Mary Jean Bullock, notetaker and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting Inc.)  Patrick O’Bannon and Connie Walker-Gray of HRA walked us through a PowerPoint presentation of their findings from the Historic Resources Study they conducted. The study identified buildings and structures over 50 years old within ¼ mile of the FERC boundary (excluding the Town of Concrete). HRA has defined the period of significance as approximately 1925 to 1960. Patrick explained that concrete production began in the Town of Concrete in 1890. The Washington Portland Cement Company industrial facilities now owned by PSE appear to meet National Register eligibility criteria. The Fisheries Program of the 1950’s has been identified as having historic significance. Attributes of this include the following fisheries protection objects/installation: • Fish traps, ladders, and conveyance systems • Collection barges with artificial pumps to attract fish • Artificially created salmon spawning beds The fisheries program was, at the time, considered the most elaborate and most expensive of all fish programs in the nation! This is considered a program that is ongoing. They also looked at eligible support facilities for the hydro operations. Some were built by the concrete company, but used by Puget. They looked at the housing and found several houses that appear eligible. Some were disqualified due to extensive alterations. They are looking at another multiple property district at Lower Baker that would include the dam and associated facilities. They also looked at recreation facilities. Those constructed along Old Baker Lake in the 1930’s (old CCC facilities and those along the Old Baker Lake resort) were inundated when the second dam was built. Pieces of the Old Resort (built in the 1930’s) were moved to a new site along the reservoir. HRA is recommending a small historic district along the reservoir up at the resort (including buildings from the 1930’s). Summary and Ramifications: Section 106 doesn’t prevent you from doing anything to historic properties. HRA has identified the following historic districts with these different themes:   • Cement Operations • Fisheries System • Hydro Support Structures (Lower Baker Area) • Recreation (Baker Lake Resort) Boundaries and counts of contributing/non-contributing resources have not yet been determined. Questions were raised re: the wisdom of calling these out as separate districts. It was also noted that many of the pre-hydroelectric resources are now under water. The HPMP would deal with these properties as eligible resources and address how to take care of them. This means that for fisheries operations, PSE would have to seek ways mitigate any adverse effects that come along with installation of new operations according to best available science. The Plan will include maintenance guidelines for historic properties. Theoretically, this will prevent historic buildings from becoming run down. However, if buildings need to be demolished because of safety or other code violations, there are provisions for doing so, within 106 and through coordination with the SHPO and the ACHP. Other Sites to Review: 1. Quarry site with multiple towers, crusher and more on east side of Lake Shannon. 2. Towers on west side of the Lake. Jessie reported that she asked permission of these property owners for these sites to be included in the study and the property owners denied permission. She will ask again. For each of the four themes, it was suggested that oral history be included to the extent possible. Even old family photos may contain some historic structures. This could be a great way to promote local history. Maybe collect oral history at the Bald Eagle Festival? John reported that this has been done over the years by the museum, though they lack transcription resources. This type of thing can be worked into the Historic Properties Management Plan (HPMP) as mitigation (transcription and availability). In the HPMP, we will consider ways to mitigate that go beyond preserving structures. HANDOUTS • HRA’s List of Historic Resources within the APE    2003cultural20030513.pdf en 