BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreation Resources Working Group July 21st, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043  AGENDA Review Agenda Review June agreements 2.1.3—Law Enforcement 2.4.2—Maintain Trails 2.5.6—Wildlife Observation Facility 6.4—Access Management 6.5—Informational, Interpretive and Educational Services and Facilities Meeting review • •  Agreements reached Action plans  Agenda for July RESOLVE session, confirm time and place  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   Adjourn  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes July 21, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. USFS Office, Mountlake Terrace, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 8538341. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Ardis Bynum (USFS—by telephone), Susan Rosborough (NPS), Jim Eyechaner (IAC), Cindy Bjorkland (NPS), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Brian Adams (Skagit County), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Cary Feldman (PSE), Dee Endelman (facilitator) July 21 Agenda Review agenda Review June agreements 2.1.3—Law Enforcement 2.4.2—Maintain Trails 2.5.6—Wildlife Observation Facility 6.4—Access Management 6.5—Informational, Interpretive and Educational Services and Facilities Meeting Review Agenda for July RESOLVE session, confirm time and place Action Items Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 6   1. Andy & Brian—Work out “certainty principle” for creating trails (2.4.1) and send ideas to group before next meeting. 2. Jim—Get IAC grant supervisor to put together a workshop on grant requirements/trail creation and general policies—report to group on date at next meeting. 3. Andy—Check on tribal enforcement policies (for 2.1.3—Law Enforcement) 4. Andy—Revise Law Enforcement PME and send to group. 5. Cindy—Get Don Burgess to come to 8/11 meeting (Education PME) 6. Andy—Talk to Greg Ball, WTA, re their volunteer program for trail maintenance. 7. Ann—Make sure Karen Nolan includes working group members in Scoping of Road Closure EA. 8. Andy—Share info from Terrestrial/Recreation group lead discussion on road closures (by e-mail). 9. Jim—Get Lewis River language re access management intent language at next meeting or e-mail before. Old Actions Items 1. Andy—Make sure that public access possibilities (for lands acquired as part of the Settlement Agreement) are included in “Access Management” section. Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules • • • • • • •  Work at understanding one another. Use airtime wisely. Speak honestly and respectfully. Examine assumptions. Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 Document our agreements.  2.5.7—ADA Compliance PSE would like to clarify standard and cost sharing for USFS land/facilities’ ADA compliance. Agreements 1  All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 2 of 6   • •  Add: It is anticipated that certain ADA implementation will be PSE’s sole responsibility and some implementation may be cost shared between PSE and USFS. Re standards, add: Applicable ADA standards will be met.  2.4.1—Create New Trails PSE would like to better define “need” for trails (underlying interest— need for certainty re cost effective trail creation during license term) Agreements • Note this as an item for the RAM Fund • Add action item to develop certainty re trail creation 2.1.3—Law Enforcement Goal: To provide a real and perceived safe environment (associated with the project) for people and resources. Issue: What is the scope of the safety need and what is the best way to meet it? Current Law Enforcement Elements Whatcom County Sheriff: USFS partially funds deputy for district (Baker Lake and Nooksack). PSE provides free housing for deputy. (County and State regs; fish & game regs) USFS Law Enforcement Officer (LEO): covers the District, enforces Forest Service regs, full time, year round. Campground hosts: PSE provides at 2 sites; USFS at 3 sites. Snowmobile: Weekend Winter Patrol (1) Seasonals: Enforce USFS regs but don’t carry a gun (2) Wilderness Rangers: Cover trails that people use—occasional NPS ranger; USFS has, too (7 altogether) Prevention Crew: Seven-day a week coverage—50% in Baker Lake Basin (3) Safety Communications: PSE Radio telephone Trail Crew: USFS Interests USFS: Safety/security of people and their ability to access emergency communications—concentration of people in Baker Basin high and spread through area so difficult to patrol—in close proximity to urban areas so people are used to higher levels of communications—potential for serious crime is high— changes in society also contributes to real and perceived safety issues—feel a need for visible presence— also want to see resource protection done. NPS: Baker Basin greatly under-protected over past 10 years—every time Wilderness patrols go through, find violations (because we’re not there enough)—primitive areas around Baker Lake, people can hike to Park from there—NPS is underfunded to provide assessment and enforcement—want to work with others Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 3 of 6   to get it done—want to see people with resource management and safety backgrounds out NGO’s (wilderness-oriented): Monitoring and enforcement of rules to allow existing wilderness in forest and park & designated roadless areas to be kept intact. Skagit County: want to see educational opportunities go hand in hand with enforcement—have that person who can hang out with people and educate them, a “presence”—rangers out there—see things change from shooting and “beer bongs” (there’s been a shift in attitude). IAC: Concerns of people in user survey (re safety) need to be addressed. WDFW: Don’t have money to enforce—want to provide regulation enforcement for fish and wildlife protection—increase in fishing—concerns about dangerous wildlife situations. PSE: Address others’ interests where prudent (ratepayers, stockholders need to be taken care of), safety for facilities in Concrete and Upper Basin—safe project environment for people recreating as part of project—comprehensive law enforcement program that PSE and others share. Scope of Needs (Agreements) • • • • • • • •  Year round need (May 31-September 1 is the heaviest need; April-October is primary time) Resource protection is part of scope, not just people (terrestrial and cultural resources) Real and perceived safety of people recreating Presence to prevent, educate people and give safety info User survey needs addressed Emergency communication and response (public and law enforcement) Safe and secure PSE facilities Project-related safety needs  Brainstorm of Alternatives (Organized by Category) 1. Plan development a. Develop a law enforcement master plan b. Develop a broad approach with special treatment for certain situations (e.g., dangerous wildlife, drugs) 2. Interagency Cooperation a. Work towards information sharing, cooperation and task sharing among law enforcement agencies b. Find someone with the ability to cover it all c. “Super ranger” d. “Super cop” e. Ability to enforce one another’s regs f. Cooperative law enforcement Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 4 of 6   g. h. i. j.  Cross train between agencies and individuals within Basin (interpreter and enforcement) Use tribal enforcement people Have LEO’s migrate to different sides of mountain (i.e., Whatcom County) Co-management/communications for emergencies between Whatcom and Skagit Counties  3. Discrete Enforcement a. WDFW enforcement officer—discrete in certain areas b. Locally stationed deputy 4. Limit access a. Limit motor vehicle access 5. Cost Effective enforcement a. Look for cost effective solutions (e.g., more Campground Hosts v. more officers) b. Block Watch program c. Baker Lake Stewards Program d. Good solid information and education for Stewards e. Safety volunteers f. Develop alternative quick response capabilities (e.g., helicopter pad) Agreements •  Phase I PME: PME to develop Law Enforcement Master Plan with our ideas as a guide. o PSE to hire a consultant to do this plan o Get law enforcement agencies together to make agreements (FERC, too)  •  Phase II PME: Implement the plan with PSE to share costs per agreement from the Policy people (Jon Vanderheyden and Ed Schild)  2.4.2—Maintain Existing Trails and Trailheads Agreements • • • •  Add X for Baker River drainage to Sulfide Camp and NC National Park Look to volunteer programs to assist with maintenance and lower costs (e.g., WTA, VOW) Add that new trails constructed and improved will be maintained. Under Summary, add: “…and cost effectively upgrade…”  2.5.6—Provide Funding for Wildlife Observation Facilities Agreements • •  Change to “Wildlife Observation Opportunities” This is an item for the RAM Fund.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 5 of 6   • • • • • •  Most last sentence of summary of actions to description of actions as an example of a location “Develop new day use opportunities…” Define the upfront action—future opportunities for RAM fund will be generally outlined Get specific about the first observation opportunity to be funded Note that facilities consider the impact on vegetation and soil and visitors’ experience—facilities appropriately designed based on environment Add RAM section to this PME  6.4—Access Management Goal: To capture access control issues not otherwise treated in PME’s and integrate competing resources uses Agreements • • •  Add: Include lands acquired as a result of settlement agreement as well as existing lands Statement of intent: Project lands open except as limited for enumerated purposes Section on cost sharing for maintenance aspects for roads and trails  Agenda for August 11, 2003 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.  Agenda, notes and action item review Information, Education and Interpretive Programs and Facilities Go over 2.1.3—Law Enforcement Go over 2.4.1—Create Trails Go over 2.4.2—Maintain Trails Go over 6.4—Access Management 2.5—Developed Campgrounds  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 6 of 6    2003recreational20030721.pdf en 