 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session October 17, 2003 8:30 am until 2pm U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA AGENDA Review Agenda, Notes, Action Items • Set expectations for what needs to be accomplished today! Review agreements from 9/30/03 meeting Acreage • Resume discussion of options, such as risk sharing, from last meeting • BAWG report on acreage discussions • PME 1.1.1 PME’s that still need to have tentative agreement, need to address in this meeting: • Bald Eagle PME – change to night roost protection instead of nest protection? • 1.2.4 Amphibians • 1.2.5 Connectivity • 1.4.1 Rare Plants • 1.4.2 Noxious Weeds • 1.?.? Breeding Birds Meeting review • Agreements reached • Action plans Set date, place, agenda for future RESOLVE session. Adjourn Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Working Group RESOLVE Session Final Notes October 17, 2003 USFS Offices Mountlake Terrace, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Don Gay and Laura Potash (USFS), Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific), Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (PSE), Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation), Len Barson (The Nature Conservancy), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NOTE: The Next RESOLVE Meeting will be November 5, from 8:30 to 2:00 in Mountlake Terrace. Agenda • Review notes, agenda, action items • Review notes from 9/30/03 meeting • Acreage o BAWG priorities and needs o PSE proposed costs o How far apart are we? How should we proceed? • 1.2.5 Connectivity • 1.2.4 Amphibians • Next Agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 5 New Action Items • ALL: Consider 50 year average, Scenario 1 re: acreage for acquisitions where we haven’t already reached tentative agreement. • Tony: E-mail group results of HYDROPS run re: amphibians. • Tony: Button up with Laura re: special plants cost estimate. Still need to do this for Carex flava. • Don: Make cost estimate for goat thing planning and implementation (by end of October.) • Marty: By October 21, send out updated list of PMEs with updated titles. • Marty: By October 17, email out snag/log species list. • ALL: Let Marty know if you have suggested changes to snag/log list. • Marty: By October 17, send out updated Rare Plant and Noxious Weed PMEs. • Marty: By October 17, email elk acreage spreadsheet and table to Working Group members. • Lauri: Work with Bob C. re: finishing up eagle PME. • Lyn: Check with Dee re: her availability to facilitate November 5 RESOLVE meeting. Ask her to let Tony know by October 20. Tony will then check with Bob as needed. • Bob N: Check with other facilitators to see who might be able to fill in for Dee if she is unavailable on November 5. Report on Completed Action Items • Lauri: Clarified with Julie intent to protect winter (vs. breeding) eagle roost sites. It is winter. • Gene: Sent Marcot snag model to group. • Marty: Buttoned up with Ron re: Getting final elk report out asap. The final draft report is out! • Tony: Updated cost estimates associated with the Rare Plant PME and send out to members to review. • Laura, Carl, Tony: Reworked language in Carex flava management plan to include flexibility, etc. • Laura: Reworked Noxious Weeds PME language (control, etc and run by Carl, Tony, Laurel for review prior to Oct. 17 meeting). • Don: Came up with an estimate of what portion of the total PME package might be satisfied if a sweeeeet piece of property were purchased. • Don: Provided connectivity map to Tony. To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules and Criteria Following are the original RESOLVE ground rules agreed to by the working group: • Work at understanding one another. • Use airtime wisely. • Speak honestly and respectfully. • Examine assumptions. • Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, October 17, 2003 Page 2 of 5 • One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 • Document our agreements. • Caucuses are okay. • For each PME, we will begin by identifying the goal and measurable objectives • We will use the 5/7/03 PME’s, as updated, for our RESOLVE discussion. • After we have agreed to a PME, Marty will revise it to reflect our agreement. Only after that will draft settlement language be written. Acreage Discussion We want habitat certainty and cost certainty related to any parcel we might purchase. Don distributed a sheet describing property value assumptions around how much of the PME package would be satisfied by purchasing a really sweet piece of property. This has not been reviewed/approved by the BAWG prior to this meeting. We all will review the figures that Don put together. Marty will also discuss this with Cary and Tony. We will review what this property would and would not satisfy. In terms of habitat. See further acreage discussions under Elk and Wetland PMEs below. 1.3.4: Bald Eagles—Non-Project Lands Lauri talked with Julie who verified that the best thing to do for eagles would be protection of winter season roosting sites. Bob C. has drafted a new PME showing an acquisition component in addition to monitoring. The BAWG will get consensus on this and present it to the group by the end of the month. They will also work on a survey methodology. Marty talked with Tom Hamer about using radar to find night roosts. It appears to be a viable option. Lauri will button up with Bob Carey re: this. 1.3.3: Provide Habitat for Legacy Wood Users (NEW TITLE!!!) We changed the name of this PME (see above) to better describe its intent. Our first step is to decide what species we will manage for. Gene gave Marty a list of what species are commonly associated with snags and logs. Marty distributed a table showing these species. All were asked to get their feedback to Marty on this by the end of the month. 1.3.6: Bald Eagle Monitoring This may change based on the re-write of 1.3.4. See notes above. 1.2.4: Protect/Enhance Wetland Habitat (NEW TITLE!!!) We changed the name of this to: Wetland Habitat. Amphibian habitat breeding protection is an objective of this PME. We noted there is overlap with the wetland component of 1.1.1. 1 All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. The group also agreed that materials to be considered at the RESOLVE session would be sent out in advance, per regular working group rules, if group members were expected to attempt agreement on those materials. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, October 17, 2003 Page 3 of 5 There is a big gap between 3 acres and 1287 acre. These numbers were using the old datum. Using the NAVD 88, 3 acres becomes 4. Each of these amounts was derived from the T7b Report. Issues to Resolve: • Scenario 1 vs. 2 (from T7b Report) o We will come up with a set of numbers for each scenario and (unless we can come to agreement) forward this to the Solution Team. • Maximum vs. average numbers o We agreed to consider using the 50 year “average” column instead of “maximum.” • Multiplier used o We agreed to consider a 3 to 1 (where ‘3’ is the PME and ‘1’ is the T7b number) ratio where we acquire and protect wetlands; and a 1 to 1 ratio where we buy degraded wetland and enhance it. For costing purposes on enhancement wetlands, we assume 2 times the acquisition cost for the enhancement. The decision to manage or enhance would be made by team members on a site-by-site basis. • Lumping vs. splitting wetland types: o We agreed to call out these four wetland types specifically as they would be managed differently: Pond, Forested Wetland, Shrub Wetland/Riparian Shrub, and Wet Meadow. 1.4.1: Rare Plants Laura reported that the PME is fine with her including final edits that Marty will get out October 17. 1.4.2: Noxious Weeds Marty will incorporate Laura’s changes (integrate Laura’s table showing what action should be taken in federal/non-federal lands by species or class) into the next draft of this PME and get it out to all by the end of the month. 1.4.3: Carex flava We are in agreement re: the language for the PME for Carex flava. We differ in terms of scope and concept. Laura and Tony will meet to discuss cost estimates and perhaps a phased approach to monitoring. 1.2.1: Provide Foraging Habitat for Elk We agreed to consider the proposal of using Scenario 1, 30-year average, with a multiplier of 1.8, which would be approximately 1,748 acres of good and marginal habitat (not including poor habitat). Note: We agreed that where a given acre meets this and the wetland PME, it could serve both purposes. 1.2.5: Provide Connectivity Habitat for Low Mobility Species We agreed to evaluate options to provide wildlife/connectivity on PSE-owned land near Upper Baker Dam. Don will investigate this and send his assessment to working group members by the end of the month. Breeding Birds PME Objectives include looking at adult population rates and causes of adult population changes over the term Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, October 17, 2003 Page 4 of 5 of the license. It would include establishing six avian monitoring stations for about $25,000/year for the initial 3 years. Bob K. implied that as training is established for agency folks, the cost might go down to about $8,000/year. There is a question about the frequency of the monitoring and how the information would be used. We agreed to continue to discuss this. The info from the study would go to the BRCC (or Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group). Any changes or enhancements suggested from the data this study yields would be considered by the BRCC/TRIG who might use the TERF to fund these suggestions. We also noted that we may decide to use this as a monitoring tool, as part of site-specific plans. Handouts: • Elk Map and acreage analysis spreadsheet and table (Marty) • T4 Analysis Species Report (CD) • Draft Property Value Assumptions and corresponding Habitat Acreage Analysis Table (Don) Agenda for Next RESOLVE Meeting November 5, 2003 at Mountlake Terrace o Review agenda, notes, action items o Review of agreements from 10/17 meeting o Acreage (Elk, wetlands, etc.) o 1.2.4: Wetlands o 1.2.5: Connectivity o 1.4.2: Carex Flava Report o Breeding Birds o 1.3.4: Bald Eagles o Identify next steps Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Terrestrial Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session, October 17, 2003 Page 5 of 5  