 Baker River Project Relicense Cross Resources Working Group Meeting May 14, 2003 Agenda Desired Outcomes: • Shared understanding of 2nd Draft PME’s (changes made to February 24 proposed draft actions) • Discussion and resolution of cross resource issues that still need work • Action plan to resolve remaining issues and move into 3rd draft PME’s Time Topic 8:00 a.m. Coffee and registration 8:30 a.m. Welcome and Introductions 8:45 a.m. Second Draft PME Review: What has changed since March? Where are we getting close to agreements? • Overview and summary of working group/cross resource work occurring in March and April • Terrestrial • Recreation • Aquatics 10:00 a.m. Break 10:10 a.m. Second Draft PME Review (continued) • Aquatics (continued) • Cultural • Economics and Operations • Shared Proposed Draft Actions 11:20 a.m. General Discussion and Feedback from PDEA Consultants • Do the PDEA consultants have what they need to do the draft analysis? • What are the most important cross resource—and other—concerns to talk about today? (E.g., access issues; erosion control; reservoir management) Noon Lunch 12:45 p.m. Dealing with Cross Resource/Other Concerns • For each issue listed, discuss: o What is the issue here? o What are the concerns and needs (i.e., interests) of the various parties? o What are some ways to address these concerns and needs? o Where do we go from here (next steps)? 2:30 p.m. Break 2:40 p.m. Dealing with Concerns (continued) 3:30 p.m. Next Steps • Conclusions reached from today’s discussions • Action plan for resolution based on today’s discussion • Next steps—third draft PMEs, beginning of license article drafting • What needs to happen to get us there? 4:30 p.m. Adjourn Baker River Project Relicense Cross Resources Working Group Meeting May 14, 2003 Directions Embassy Suites Hotel 20610 44th Ave. West Lynnwood, WA 98036 Phone: 425-775-2500 Fax: 425-774-0485 From I-5 Northbound: • Exit 181A • Take a right off the exit onto 44th Ave. W. • Take a right at the Quadrant I-5 Center sign From I-5 Southbound: • Exit 181 (Lynnwood 524) • Stay in the far left lane • At the intersection, take a left onto 196th St. SW (going west) • Go to 44th Ave. W. and take a left • Stay on 44th Ave. W. under I-5 for about 2 blocks • Turn right at the Quadrant I-5 Center sign Baker River Project Relicense Cross Resources Working Group Meeting May 14, 2003 Meeting Attendees Adams, Brian – Skagit Co. Aspelund, Arnie – PSE Barson, Len – The Nature Conservancy Brookings, Dave – Skagit Co. Campbell, Larry – Swinomish Tribe Ebel, Chuck – Corps of Engineers Efird, Carol – Berger Group Endelman, Dee – Agreement Dynamics Eychaner, Jim – Interagency Comm. Outdoor Recreation Feldmann, Cary – PSE Fransen, Steve – NMFS Freeland, Connie – PSE Fuch, Tony – PSE Goldsworthy, Patrick – N. Cascades Conservation Council Hatfield, Andy – PSE Lawson, Chris – Huckell/Weinman Mace, Rod – USFS Mierendorf, Bob – NPS Mohn, Rob – Berger Group Nelson, Bob – Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation Olin, Kris – PSE Pernela, Lloyd – PSE Piper, Jessie – PSE Reinard, Bill – Wildcat Steelhead Club Sakrison, Rod – DOE Schild, Ed – PSE Thoreen, Arn – Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group Vaughn, Marty – Biota Pacific Verretto, Nick – PSE Walsh, Stan – Skagit System Cooperative Wetherbee, Paul – PSE Wiltse, Lyn – PDSA Consulting BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cross-Resources Workshop May 14, 2003 8:00 a.m. – 4:30 p.m. Embassy Suites, Lynnwood, Washington MEETING NOTES PRESENT Brian Adams – Skagit Co., Eli Asher – Agreement Dynamics, Arnie Aspelund – PSE, Ken Brettmann – Corps of Engineers, Dave Brookings – Skagit Co., Keith Brooks – FERC (by phone), Lorna Ellestad – Skagit Co., Dee Endelman – Agreement Dynamics, Jim Eychaner – Interagency Comm. Outdoor Recreation, Cary Feldmann – PSE, Steve Fransen – NMFS, Connie Freeland – PSE, Tony Fuchs – PSE, Patrick Goldsworthy – North Cascades Conservation Council, Andy Hatfield – PSE, Phil Hilgert – R2 Consulting, Ron Kent – Corps of Engineers, Mark Kilgore – Berger Group, Pam Klatt – Berger Group, Linda Lehman – FERC (by phone), Rod Mace – USFS, Kevin Malone – Berger Group, Brian Mattax – Berger Group, Bob Mierendorf – NPS, Rob Mohn – Berger Group, Joel Molander – PSE, Bob Nelson – Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation, Kris Olin – PSE, Lloyd Pernela – PSE, Jessie Piper – PSE, Bill Reinard – Wildcat Steelhead Club, Desiree Robinson – PSE, Susan Rosebrough – NPS, Rod Sakrison – DOE, Ed Schild – PSE, Kathy Smayda – Berger Group, Gary Sprague – WDFW, Arn Thoreen – Skagit Fisheries Enhancement Group, Marty Vaughn – Biota Pacific, Nick Verretto – PSE, Pat Weslowski – Berger Group, Paul Wetherbee – PSE, Lyn Wiltse – PDSA Consulting, Bob Wright – DOE. AGENDA May 14, 2003 Agenda – Embassy Suites, Lynnwood, WA 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Desired Outcomes: • Shared understanding of 2nd Draft PMEs (changes made to February 24 proposed draft actions) • Discussion and resolution of cross resource issues that still need work • Action plan to resolve remaining issues and move into 3rd draft PMEs BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/14/2003 MEETING NOTES Page 1 Cross-Resources Workshop FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Welcome and Introductions Second Draft PME Review: What has changed since March? Where are we getting close to agreements? • Overview and summary of working group/cross resource work occurring in March and April • Terrestrial • Recreation • Aquatics • Cultural • Economics and Operations • Shared Proposed Draft Actions General Discussion and Feedback from PDEA Consultants • Where have we made some good progress? • Do the PDEA consultants have what they need to do the draft analysis? • What are the most important cross-resource and other concerns to talk about today? (E.g., access issues; erosion control; reservoir management) Dealing with Cross-Resource/Other Concerns • For each issue listed, discuss: o What is the issue here? o What are the concerns and needs (i.e., interests) of the various parties? o What are some ways to address these concerns and needs? o Where do we go from here (next steps)? Next Steps • Conclusions reached from today’s discussions • Action plan for resolution based on today’s discussion • Next steps—third draft PMEs, beginning of license article drafting • What needs to happen to get us there? Adjourn NEW ACTION ITEMS • Team Leaders: Email sign-up lists for your workgroup members for cross-resource teamlets by May 16. • Kris: Send email memo to group explaining NAVD update. • Phil: Distribute CD with newly calculated daily flows and other relevant info by May 24. • Connie: Distribute Workshop minutes by May 19. • PSE: Draft operating plan for Berger to use in PDEA by June 1 (combination of PME 3.3.1 Flow Regime and 6.3 Reservoir Management) PME PRESENTATIONS A representative from each of the working groups presented an update on the 2nd draft PMEs from their resource working group. They highlighted changes from the initial draft actions (proposed by PSE in February), the current status (to what extent working group members are in agreement about the PME), and the focus (in terms of next steps). Terrestrial Presenter: Marty Vaughn BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/14/2003 MEETING NOTES Page 2 Cross-Resources Workshop FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Recreation Presenter: Andy Hatfield Aquatics Presenter: Steve Fransen Cultural/Historic Presenter: Bob Mierendorf Econ/Ops Presenter: Paul Wetherbee Shared Cross-Resource PME Presenters: Cary Feldmann and Andy Hatfield HYDROPS UPDATE Paul Wetherbee reported on the status of the Economics/Operations Group’s PME regarding Flood Control. He also gave a HYDROPS update: the most recent version was received by PSE last week and is currently being tested and evaluated. The Technical Scenario Teamlet was formed to deal primarily with the HYDROPS model. The Teamlet has met several times and has more meetings scheduled in coming months. FERC Keith Brooks and Linda Lehman of FERC joined the discussion via telephone. Keith addressed the issue of the timeline for this relicensing process. Keith stated that the license application must be filed by April 30, 2004, and should be accompanied by the completed settlement agreement. This is the only way to keep the decisions local. If a completed settlement agreement cannot be reached by license application deadline, a schedule for future work on the settlement should be submitted with the license application. Keith addressed both recent cases in which FERC provided more time for settlement: Chelan and Box Canyon, which received extensions of only a few months. Long-term extensions (such as a year) will not be granted. PDEA Rob Mohn of the Louis Berger Group presented an update on the PDEA, including the current timeline and the need for HYDROPS modeling in early June. He distributed a paper copy of updates on the PMEs and explained the methodology behind the spreadsheet, as well as its purpose. He stressed the need for clarity and rationale in the various PMEs. He addressed the specific problems that the Louis Berger Group had with individual PMEs. Rob requested that the current PME package be redrafted in order to facilitate drafting of license articles. He also requested that Puget provide an instream flow release plan. The group split into working groups to discuss the Berger Group’s comments on the PMEs. CROSS-RESOURCE ISSUES The group reviewed the following list of cross-resource issues from the March 4-6 workshop in Mount Vernon: 1. Road and Trail Access (road management requires USFS EA before action) 2. Dispersed Camping 3. Developed Sites 4. Large Woody Debris management 5. Reservoir Management (all aspects) 6. Instream Flows and Ramping (falls under reservoir management) 7. Land Management (cross-species/working group synergies) 8. Upstream Fish Passage 9. Downstream Fish Passage 10. Sensitive Areas BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/14/2003 MEETING NOTES Page 3 Cross-Resources Workshop FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 11. Ground Disturbing Activities (including re-vegetation) 12. Surface Water Uses 13. Cultural Review of Proposed Land Disturbing Activities The group discussed the relative importance and relevance of the above issues to cross-resource discussion. The group discussed the formation of a teamlet (possibly virtual, over email) to deal with cross-resource issues. The group discussed dispersed and developed sites and decided to merge them into one issue. (Andy/Rec) The group discussed Large Woody Debris, including Skagit County’s interest in the issue. Specifically, the County owns bridges that require maintenance to remove collected debris and deals with homeowners who suffer erosion problems from logjams, etc. Rob Mohn suggested that the County be a consulted party in post-license management planning of Large Woody Debris. (Arnie) The group discussed Reservoir Management as it relates to all of the working groups. (Arnie) Land Management synergies and conflicts were discussed. Possible “Tony Teamlet”? (Tony) Upstream Fish Passage was discussed and amended to include “availability of salmon carcasses.” Downstream Fish Passage was also briefly discussed. (Nick) Sensitive Areas were defined and integrated into Ground Disturbing Activities and Road and Trail Access. (Jessie/Tony) Surface Water Uses (e.g., “loons and boats”) were discussed, including shoreline management plans, which are linked to sensitive areas. The group discussed the details of jurisdiction over surface water usage. The county has regulatory jurisdiction over surface water use. The group distinguished issues surrounding surface water use (over which Puget has no control) and non-regulatory shoreline management plans for PSE-owned lands on Baker Lake and Lake Shannon, which are Puget’s responsibility. (Connie) They renamed “Road and Trail Access” to “Road, Trail and Shoreline Access.” The group brainstormed some possible ground disturbing activities related to the Project: trails, campsites, trap & haul activities and facilities, downstream construction, plantings/wetland enhancement, fill, boater safety/stump removal, culverts, boat ramps, access roads, utility/water, sewer, fishery enhancement, and other development in undeveloped areas. The facilitation team developed this condensed, revised list of cross-resource issues and their working group leaders: 1. Access Management (Roads, Trails and Shorelines) – Leader: Andy Hatfield (Recreation Working Group) 2. Campsites – Leader: Andy Hatfield 3. Large Woody Debris – Leader: Arnie Aspelund (Aquatics Working Group) 4. Reservoir Management/Instream Flows – Leaders: Arnie Aspelund and Paul Wetherbee BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/14/2003 MEETING NOTES Page 4 Cross-Resources Workshop FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 (Technical Scenario Teamlet) 5. Land Management Synergies – Leader: Tony Fuchs (Terrestrial Working Group) 6. Upstream Fish Passage/Salmon Carcass Availability – Leader: Nick Verretto (Aquatics Working Group) 7. Ground Disturbing Activities – Leaders: Jessie Piper (Cultural Resources Working Group) and Tony Fuchs North American Vertical Datum Phil Hilgert of R2 Consulting brought up a cross-resource issue regarding mapping datum: the maps for the Project area will be updated to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 reference. Kris will send an email memo to the group explaining the change. PSE plans to have a new data set on daily flows and reservoir levels on CD by May 24. This change also affects past and future surface area, volume, and perimeter calculations. NEXT STEPS Team Leaders will email out sign-up lists for their working group members for cross-resource teamlet(s) by May 16. The Louis Berger Group expressed concern over substantial data missing from PMEs for two issues. One in particular is the Area of Project Effects. Evaluation is dependent on definite boundaries. In order to prevent future conflicts and facilitate accurate assessment, the boundaries of the Area of Project Effects need to be set. The other is the need for a pool level baseline for continuing impacts analysis. At issue are competing interests from different working groups (terrestrial vs. recreation, for example). The group discussed the Project boundaries, clarifying the difference between the existing boundary and proposed boundaries that are included in the PMEs. Dee distributed a flow chart that the Solution Team has been discussing as a path to settlement. She explained the function of the chart to the group. Dee hopes that most issues can be resolved in the working groups in the next few months, using the RESOLVE process. She further reviewed how the Solution Team would become involved in approving working group recommendations and in resolving issues that could not be resolved by the working groups. If the Solution Team cannot resolve some issues, these would be sent to a Policy Team, to be called together if needed. HANDOUTS • Agenda • Suggested Ground Rules • Packet of PME PowerPoint presentation slides • Packet of 2nd Draft PMEs (May 7, 2003) • Packet of Revised Aquatics Resources 2nd Draft PMEs (May 9, 2003) • Feedback from PDEA consultants (Louis Berger Group) • Flow Chart: PMEs to License Articles & Settlement Agreement BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT 5/14/2003 MEETING NOTES Page 5 Cross-Resources Workshop FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  