BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group October 24th, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. RESOLVE Mt. Baker – Ranger District 810 State Route 20 Sedro-Woolly, WA  AGENDA 1.  2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.  Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items Education PME RAM Fund PME timeline Review of 10/15/03 PME package Discuss need for additional meetings Evaluate Meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes October 24, 2003 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. USFS Office, Sedro-Wooley WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 8538341. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Ardis Bynum (USFS), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Andy Hatfield (PSE), Cindy Bjorkland (NPS), Carey Feldmann (PSE), Dee Endelman (facilitator) October 24 Agenda 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.  Review agenda, notes and action items Review Education PME (6.5.3) RAM Fund (2.6.1) PME Timeline Review of 10/15/03 PME package • Issues to discuss? • Priorities? 6. Discuss additional meetings New Action Items 1. Ardis—Write straightforward PME version by 11/10 and send to Andy for distribution to group. 2. Andy—Call Marguerite Austin re IAC policy and how we should draft PME’s to potentially Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group RESOLVE Session Page 1 of 3   leverage IAC grant funding. 3. Ardis—Re-write 6.5 to reflect our discussion of the goals (for Information, Interpretation and Education) Old Action Items 1. Ann—Give Andy the number of miles on Rainbow Ridge Trail. 2. Andy—Check on tribal enforcement policies (for 2.1.3—Law Enforcement) 3. Ann and Andy—Re, 2.5.7 (Wildlife Observation), calculate distances for each type of loop, cost out. 4. Ann—re-write trigger language in 2.5.1 (Bayview) to reflect USFS interest in timing certainty. 5. Ann and Andy—Discuss Interpretive PME and draft language changes Notes from RESOLVE Meetings To permit the greatest degree of open dialogue, the group agreed that notes for the RESOLVE sessions will be less formal than regular working group meetings. We will primarily document agreements and action items. RESOLVE Groundrules • • • • • • • •  Work at understanding one another. Use airtime wisely. Speak honestly and respectfully. Examine assumptions. Make tentative agreements, then look at the whole package together. One meeting review rule: we have one meeting to review and change the tentative agreements of the previous RESOLVE session.1 Document our agreements. Caucuses are okay.  Note: At this meeting, we used 5th Draft PME’s dated October 6, 2003. Education (6.5.3)  1  •  Clarify language in the rationale to explain the stewardship component to this PME. Identify more specifically its import to the project, the importance of “developing a constituency” that understands the link between hydro power and the Basin and resource conservation in the Basin.  •  Location and Scope Examples: Change “…primarily based in the Baker Basin…” to “…must have a nexus to and pertain to the Baker project.”  All agreements are tentative even after the “one meeting review rule”. However, the one meeting rule gives regular participants an opportunity to bring an agreement back to the table while assuring that tentative agreements are not forever reopened. It also accommodates regular participants who must miss a meeting and may want to weigh in on a decision. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 2 of 3   •  The focus of the Education PME (versus the Information and Interpretive PME’s) is outreach to those who aren’t visiting the Basin to help them become aware and potentially change their behavior toward the Basin, resources and develop a better understanding of hydroelectric power.  RAM Fund (2.6.1) •  We should address what the RAM fund money is for (e.g., eligible entities, projects, activities)— we need to decide how much we want to limit ourselves in this regard.  •  The fund disbursement should be under the control of the Recreation subgroup of the BRCC.  •  Our priorities for spending RAM funds: 1. Capital improvement within the Baker Basin. 2. Other desirable outcomes for recreation in the Basin (e.g., programs).  •  Each six years, we will revisit Recreation needs and re-set priorities, if needed.  •  Each 12 years, reset the priorities and revise the Plan, as needed.  •  Pull up all the RAM-related ideas from the PME’s and make them into examples in the RAM Fund language.  •  Take the Aquatics HERC Fund language and tailor it to Recreation.  Next Steps •  We should re-draft the PME’s to state them more plainly, removing the categories that the group originally wanted to include to make sure all the issues were covered (e.g., timing, scope, etc.)  •  Ardis volunteered to take on this task and have it complete by November 10, 2003.  •  Andy will distribute the re-drafted PME’s to the working group.  •  The group will decide whether to meet again in short order after these PME’s are distributed.  •  We could use some of the time from our next working group meeting to talk about RESOLVE issues.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 3 of 3    2003recreational20031024.pdf en 