 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Technical Scenario Teamlet Conference Call May 5, 2003 10:00 a.m. – 12:00 a.m. Dial in: (866) 280-6429 Guest #: 144995 OBC-14N Conference Room AGENDA 1) Review Notes 10:00 – 10:10 2) Review Action Items 10:10 – 10:40 a) Review Recent Conditions Edits b) Review Dependable Capacity Modeling Requirements c) Update on Stage-Volume issues 3) HYDROPS Status Report 10:40 – 11:00 4) Report from Instream Flows Technical Working Group 11:00 – 11:10 5) Report from Economics Working Group 11:10 – 11:20 6) Review Revised Draft Request Form 11:20 – 11:30 7) Initial Discussion of Global Assumptions 11:30 – 11:50 8) Set Agenda for May 9 teleconference 11:50 – 11:55 9) Set times for future meetings 11:55 - 12:00 April 25, 2003 Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150 Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC Project No. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Technical Scenario Teamlet May 5, 2003 10:00 to noon PSE Office (One Bellevue Center) Bellevue, WA MEETING NOTES Teamlet Leader: Paul Wetherbee, 425-462-3746, paul.wetherbee@pse.com PRESENT: Paul Wetherbee, Tony Fuchs, Bob Barnes, Stan Walsh on phone (Skagit System Cooperative), Margaret Beilharz and Scott Lentz on phone (USFS), Mark Killgore (The Louis Berger Group), Ruth Mathews on phone (The Nature Conservancy), Chuck Howard on phone (Consultant), Gary Sprague on phone (WDFW), Stuart Beck on phone (R2). FUTURE REGULAR WORKING GROUP DATES/LOCATIONS May 9 from 10:00 – 12:00 pm at PSE Office in Bellevue (later cancelled), May 21 from 1:00 – 3:00 pm at PSE Office in Bellevue, May 30 from 10:00-noon at PSE Office in Bellevue, June 6, 10:00 – 12:00 at PSE Office in Bellevue. These meetings will mostly be by conference call: Dial 1-866-280-6429. Enter participant code 144995#. For those planning to attend in person, the meetings will be in the conference room of OBC (One Bellevue Center) on the 14th floor. DRAFT AGENDA FOR MAY 5, 2003 10:00 – noon at PSE Office in Bellevue (14th floor conference room) 1. Review Notes 2. Review Action Items • Review Recent Conditions Edits • Review Dependable Capacity Modeling Requirements • Update on Stage-Volume Issues 3. HYDROPS Status Report 4. Report from Instream Flows Technical Working Group Baker River Project Relicense 1 of 3 Technical Scenario Teamlet File:5-5-03 Final Draft TST notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse 5. Report from Economics Working Group 6. Review Revised Draft Request Form 7. Initial Discussion of Global Assumptions 8. Set agenda for May 9 teleconference 9. Set times for future meetings NEW ACTION ITEMS • Paul: Send out sample scenarios (proposed base-case) run and results. • Paul: Send out list of all HYDROPS technical background information available on the website. • Paul: Check back with Powel to see when they can update and distribute HYDROPs demonstration PowerPoint slides. • Stuart: Coordinate R2 and Bob Barnes effort to resolve the geographic datum issue and report back to group at next meeting. • Stuart/Bob: Develop updated area-volume curves for both reservoirs. • Stuart and/or Sue and Ruth: Continue discussion of IHA post-processing and report back to group on progress in next meeting. • Paul: Distribute meeting notes from the 5/2/03 meeting of the Instream Flow Technical Teamlet.to the TST • Paul: Investigate HYDROPS ability to model reserve capacity and report to group at next meeting. • Paul: Analyze sensitivity of spawning/incubation flow calculation method, prepare short brief and present to TST at next meeting. • Paul: Complete example model run request form using Margaret’s changes, distribute to group, and discuss at next meeting. • Paul/Lloyd: Distribute white paper or other supporting information on the energy prices used in the model. • Paul: Distribute brief on what has been done to define representative hydroclimatic sequences in the Econ/Ops and Aquatic Resources working groups. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • All: Margaret provided input for changes to the first sheet of the scenario request form. • Paul: Incorporated changes to April 17 meeting minutes and distributed to group. • Mark: Arrange for notetaker for May 5 meeting. Unfortunately she called in sick and was not able to attend. • Bob: Resolving datum issues with help from Stuart and R2. Anticipate resolving issue at May 21 meeting. • Lloyd: Update HYDROPS references and compile list of available titles on the web site. Action Item transferred to Paul. • Ruth & Sue: Discussing IHA post-processing and planned R2 analyses. Task on-going and will be discussed at next meeting. • Mark: Distributed and discussed white paper on dependable capacity analysis. REVIEW RECENT CONDITIONS EDITS Baker River Project Relicense Page 2 of 4 Technical Scenarios Teamlet 5-5-03 Final Draft TST notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse Paul distributed the Recent Conditions Summary containing the most recent edits. The group agreed the elements represented the recent conditions. REVIEW DEPENDABLE CAPACITY MODELING REQUIREMENTS Mark discussed his white paper on modeling dependable capacity. The brief establishes the significance of the dependable capacity analysis and identifies a method to use HYDROPS to perform the analysis. Chuck pointed out that environmental or flood control restrictions potential impact dependable capacity via head loss. Group asked several questions regarding sensitivity to peak and off peak pricing values. Several in group still digesting proposed approach (Paul, Ruth). Mark’s experience is that this issue has potentially the largest economic impacts on project benefits. UPDATE ON STAGE-VOLUME ISSUES Bob and Stuart described the status of the vertical datum resolution issue with respect to the new data from the Walker survey. Current understanding is that the new data does not significantly vary from the existing data once the data are on a consistent datum [BOB AND STUART CHECK ME ON THIS] HYDROPS STATUS REPORT Paul reported that he has been testing the beta version without the multi-year run capability. Paul anticipates receiving beta version with multi-year run capability this week. He will begin testing next beta version as soon as he receives it. REPORT FROM INSTREAM FLOW TECHNICAL TEAMLET Paul, Stan, and Gary attended this meeting from this teamlet. Paul reported that he briefed the Instream flow Teamlet on the status of HYDROPS and the developments of the TST. He reported that the Instream Flow meeting discussed the downstream habitat models being developed by R2 in considerable detail for the majority of the meeting. The instream flow group did not delineate specific output requirements with respect to the HYDROPS modeling. REPORT FROM ECONOMICS WORKING GROUP Paul could not remember why this was on the agenda and no one had anything to add. REVIEW REVISED DRAFT REQUEST FORM Margaret discussed the revisions she made to page one of the HYDROPS model request run. Major changes include boxes to define the time periods of the requested analysis and more detailed information on the hard and soft constraints. Paul is tasked with working with the form and using it to work up an example from Stan’s requests. INITIAL DISCUSSION OF GLOBAL ASSUMPTIONS Paul discussed the idea of global assumptions or variables. Things we could discuss once and then not re-open because they would be held constant in the comparative analysis. Energy prices are element that is input to the model that fits this description. Mark suggested inflow hydrology is another, assuming the user maintains the ability to select sub-sets from the hydrologic record. We will address energy prices in next TST meetings. Gary suggested that critical flow for ramping restrictions maybe another one global variable that can be set once and then not Baker River Project Relicense Page 3 of 4 Technical Scenarios Teamlet 5-5-03 Final Draft TST notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse adjusted. Stan questioned whether definition of critical flow would be accomplished soon enough to benefit the first wave of modeling. Gary thought it could be. Baker River Project Relicense Page 4 of 4 Technical Scenarios Teamlet 5-5-03 Final Draft TST notes.doc; Lyn Wiltse  