 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Resources Working Group January 13, 2004 10:00 p.m.- 4:00 p.m. US Forest Service Office 10 State Route 20 Sedro-Woolley AGENDA TOLL free conference number - To Call into this Meeting Step 1 -Dial 1-866-280-6429 Step 2 -Dial Participant code 144995 followed by # sign You will hear hold music if "host" (Facilitator or Team Leader) has not yet dialed into the number • When "Host" has called in to the number, you will be joined to the call 1. Introductions 2. Review November 18, 2003 Notes and Agenda 3. Action Items 4. TST Report 5. HPMP comments/update 6. Update on TCP studies 7. Review of other studies: Archaeology Report, HBS (Revised Report) 8. Begin PME review/mapping exercise (include in HPMP those that will include ground disturbing within first 5 years of license). 9. Set Agenda for February 11 meeting 10. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 1 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Distribution List Baker River Cultural/Historical Resources Working Group Organization Name Email National Park Service Ryan Booth Ryan_Booth@nps.gov Equinox Research & Consulting Kelly Bush Kelrbush@earthlink.net US Forest Service Ardis Bynum abynum@fs.fed.us Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Larry Campbell lcampbell@swinomish.nsn.us Puget Sound Energy Connie Freeland connie.freeland@pse.com US Forest Service Jan Hollenbeck jhollenbeck@fs.fed.us; Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Jason Joseph sauk@sauk-suiattle.com Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Norma Joseph njoseph@sauk-suiattle.com US Army Corps of Engineers Ronald Kent ronald.J.Kent@nws02.usace.army.mil National Park Service Bob Mierendorf bob_mierendorf@nps.gov Northwest Archaeological Associates Christian Miss cjmiss@northwestarch.com Puget Sound Energy Jessie Piper jessie.piper@pse.com Upper Skagit Indian Tribe Scott Schuyler sschuyler@upperskagit.com WA Dept. Natural Resources Lee Stilson lee.stilson@wadnr.gov WA Office Archaeology & Rob Whitlam robw@cted.wa.gov Historic Preservation PDSA Consulting Lyn Wiltse lyn@pdsaconsulting.com Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Frank Winchell frank.winchell@ferc.gov Distribution List Baker River Cultural/Historical Resources Interested Parties* Organization Name Email Concrete Heritage Museum John Boggs jboggswash@aol.com Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Ernie DeCoteau police@sauk-suiattle.com Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Martin Loesch mloesch@swinomish.nsn.us; Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Charlie O'Hara cohara@swinomish.nsn.us Skagit County Historical Museum Karen Marshall karenm@co.skagit.wa.us National Park Service Susan Rosebrough susan_rosebrough@nps.gov US Forest Service Jon Vanderheyden jvanderheyden@fs.fed.us; Swinomish Indian Tribal Community/ Stan Walsh swalsh@skagitcoop.org Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Louis Berger Associates Pat Weslowski weslowski@louisberger.com * Non-confidential communications only (Meeting Agenda and Meeting Notes, announcements, etc.) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 2 FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural & Historical Working Group January 13, 2004 10:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Building 10 State Route 20 Sedro Woolley, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Mission: “To develop alternatives and recommendations addressing cultural, historical and archeological resources for the Baker River Project relicensing process.” Team Leader: Jessie Piper (425) 462-3609, jessie.piper@pse.com PRESENT: Jessie Piper (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Kelly Bush (Equinox Research), Ron Kent (US Army Corps of Engineers), Bob Mierendorf (National Park Service), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community), Scott Schuyler (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Rob Whitlam by phone (WA Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation), Frank Winchell by phone (FERC), Kelly Cahill (Curator of North Cascades National Park), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Mary Jean Wiltse, notetaker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.) FUTURE MEETING DATES – 2004 Feb. 10, March 9, April 13, May 11, and June 8. All meetings will be at the PSE office in Mt. Vernon unless otherwise specified. All regular attendees are encouraged to let Jessie know if they are unable to attend a meeting. INTRODUCTIONS The group welcomed Kelly Cahill who is the new curator for North Cascades National Park. TENTATIVE Agenda for January 13, 2004, 10:00-4:00 p.m. U.S. Forest Service Office, Sedro-Woolley, WA BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 1 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 1. Introductions 2. Review November 18, 2003 Notes and Agenda 3. Action Items 4. TST Report 5. HPMP comments/update –License Article/Funding PME 6. Update on TCP studies 7. Review of other studies: Archaeology Report, HBS (Revised Report)/ Curation 8. Begin PME review/mapping exercise (include in HPMP those that will include ground disturbing within first 5 years of license). 9. Set Agenda for February 10 meeting 10. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • Jessie: Arrange meeting location for February 10, 2004 and notify members. • Jessie: Update contact list. • Bob: Share Table of Contents from Ross Lake Management Plan with Chris. • Jessie/Jan: Re: Listing process. Discuss meaning of “cooperate” and whether/how to include this in the HPMP language. • ALL: Get your comments to Chris on October version of HPMP by January 30. • ALL: Get comments on Historic Building Structures and Archaeology.reports to Jessie by January 26. • Jessie: Get together teamlet of Jan, Kelly, Rob to propose wording for Draft License Article 4.1.1 and send out to the entire team to review by the end of the month. • Jessie: Meet with Cary Feldmann re: wording for 4.2.1 and send out to Working Group members for approval so it can be sent to Louis Berger to be translated into license Article language. • ALL: Review 4.2.1 “proposed final” wording and get comments back to Jessie by January 26. • Jessie: Follow-up with Kelly C. re: curation costs. • Bob: Bring slide show on Ross Lake site stabilization to February 10 meeting. • Jessie: Check with Frank regarding signature requirements for Determination of Eligibility documentation. REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Jessie: Buttoned up with Russell Holter (OAHP) and Frank (FERC) re: HBS review timeline. We are on schedule. Note: The study is not confidential in terms of cultural resources, but it is restricted from an infrastructure standpoint. • Jessie: On December 2, sent out confirmation of December 9 meeting. • Bob: Reported that it would be premature to share treatment/monitoring plans from Ross Lake. The table of contents is now available, but the written document has not yet had tribal review. Bob will discuss the table of contents with Chris prior to our next meeting. • ALL: Got any additional comments to Kelly re: the Ethnographic Overview she put together. • Jessie: Emailed out the November 24, 2003 PME Status Table to everyone. Since then she has also sent out a table that was updated in December 10, 2003. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 2 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 • Jessie: Talked with new curator of North Cascades National Park, Kelly Cahill, regarding curation possibilities. Kelly came today to our meeting and gave a presentation. SCHEDULE Jessie walked us through a memo from Rob Mohn outlining the schedule of deadlines for the next version of the PDEA. We also reviewed the milestone list for the broader relicense schedule. We agreed to get comments in on the HBS and Archaeology reports by January 26 and on the HPMP by January 30. Note: Jan will be out of town from just after our meeting on February 10 until February 27. HPMP DISCUSSION How do we adequately address effects of known actions? • Include as much site-specific information in HPMP as possible. • Build in method to incorporate new knowledge (flexibility). Much of the unknown will be handled through Adaptive Management. Unanticipated conflicts will come up. We need a mechanism to provide for re-direction. We anticipate relationship building and information sharing throughout the term. • State more explicitly that there will be a cultural resources review of future actions. Chris encouraged team members to read the HPMP as it addresses the concerns noted above. TECHNICAL SCENARIO TEAMLET (TST) REPORT Lyn reported that the TST has been meeting regularly and is hoping to approve a flow regime that meets economic as well as cultural/environmental interests at their meeting January 16. She’ll give us an update at our next meeting. 4.1.1 IMPLEMENT THE HISTORIC PROPERTIES MANAGEMENT PLAN We reviewed the language for the draft license article 4.1.1. Rob had voiced concerns about the section that states the HPMP will continue in the event that the Programmatic Agreement is terminated. Frank strongly suggested keeping the language the way it is because it is accepted FERC language and assures that cultural resources will be protected, as provided for in the HPMP in the event that “dark forces” cause the termination of the Programmatic Agreement (PA). Jan felt strongly that the FERC language could be interpreted as requiring adherence to the HPMP even if the PA was terminated due to concerns/inadequacies with the HPMP. After considerable discussion, members suggested the following language be inserted (replacing “In the event the Programmatic Agreement is terminated, the licensee shall implement the provisions of its approved HPMP.”): If the PA is terminated, FERC will follow the 36CFR 800.3-800.7 regulations. After further discussion, it became clear that there was not consensus by team members to use this language. Jessie will organize a teamlet of Jan, Kelly, Rob to propose wording for Draft License Article 4.1.1 and send out to the entire team to review by the end of the month. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 3 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 4.2.1 Provide a Cultural Resources Enhancement Fund (CREF) Jessie introduced this PME and explained that it follows the model being used by other resource Working Groups in the relicense process. She further explained the name change to (“enhancement”) to distinguish it from Management Plan. The Cultural Resources Advisory Group (CRAG) (which will function as the Cultural Resources Subcommittee of the Baker River Coordinating Committee (BRCC) would provide oversight for this funding. The aim of this PME is to provide an Adaptive Management funding measure to capture future needs/opportunities we are not presently aware of. It might also provide the ability to address things outside the existing Management Plan such as enhanced research, etc. We agreed to use the proposed funding schedule: Annual Funding Years 10-19 (2015-2024) $20,000/year x 10 years=$200,000 Annual Funding Years 20-25 (2025-2030) $30,000/year x 6 years=$180,000 Total CREF Fund (16 years)=$380,000 Unallocated funds would roll over from one year to the next. Next steps will include establishing priorities for how this fund would be spent. For now, we agreed to put in placeholder language at the end of the Description of Action section stating that the CRAG would identify priorities and limitations (such as geographic boundaries) and develop criteria for funding use as one of their initial actions (March-April timeframe): “The CRAG will identify priorities, criteria, scheduling and mechanisms for implementing the funding process.” HISTORIC PROPERTIES MANAGEMENT PLAN (HPMP) Chris is eagerly awaiting feedback from team members on the HPMP. We agreed that the deadline for getting comments back to her would be extended to January 30. UPDATE ON TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTY (TCP) STUDIES We agreed to separate the Ethnographic Overview into two reports: • Status of TCP investigations (Licensing-related information) • Ethnographic Overview (Vital ethnographic information) Kelly reported the licensing information report will be out by February 2. The Ethnographic Overview will be out by March 1. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 4 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Consider: Modification of this report to create a public version (approved by the tribes). Perhaps this might take the form of a picture book? A poster? The Upper Skagits are in the final stages of completing their short item report. They have submitted their research design for a long-term oral history project. The Sauk-Suiattle have submitted the research design for their oral history project. The Swinomish are still considering how they want to proceed. Note: The Upper Skagit Indian Tribe does not feel that the other two tribes should, in any way, be obligated to follow the process or format they used for this. ARCHAEOLOGY REPORT: HBS (Revised Report) We agreed to propose the archaeology sites as a district. Tribes would comment and SHIPO would approve this. Chris will develop a configuration of how this district might look. She’ll send this out for review by February 1, along with a draft DOE. Jessie will check with Frank (FERC), regarding signature requirements and the role the Forest Service plays in this. CURATION Kelly Cahill, Curator of the North Cascades National Park, shared the following things we should consider related to curation: • Scope of collections (artifacts and natural resources) • How we will decide what to include • Space needs: o Rent? o Agreement re: maintenance/upgrade/staffing, etc.? o Environmental controls • Existing facility? • University of Washington’s Burke Museums (State Repository) • Other available facilities • Personnel - NPS now requires curators in charge of collections to be at a GS-11 level. • Training and travel • Software access/databases for collection management (North Cascades has proprietary archiving software). • Archive, retrieval functions • Photos, paintings, drawings • Collection and curation maintenance guidelines are available from the NPS. • Exhibits (show electronically? Use brochure? Photo reproductions? • National Park Service issues oversight reports periodically. • Kelly oversees the curation of over two million objects. They are filling the space as fast as they can build the facilities! • Multi-disciplinary collections are not a problem. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 5 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 We would like to see artifacts from this process maintained locally, as a single collection. Seattle City Light and the Muckleshoot Tribe have curation facilities that are good models to follow. Jessie will follow-up with Kelly re: costs. HANDOUTS • Email From Robert Mohn To Pat Weslowski, December 9, 2003 Subject: Baker PDEA/Application Update • Baker Relicense Project – Milestone Dates – 1/204 to 9/1/04 • Draft License Article 4.1.1 Implement the Historic Properties Management Plan • Draft PME: Provide a Cultural Resources Enhancement Fund (CREF) PARKING LOT • How do we address upland area? –importance of mountain goats • Develop APE – Consider property ownership • Coordinate with Terrestrial and Recreation Working Groups • Develop traditional/cultural property studies (TCPs) • Determine criteria for “livingness” of APE • Glossary of terms: what are “protection,” “mitigation,” and “enhancement”? • Rotate meeting locations to tribal facilities? • Possibility of transplanting young cedar trees/Availability of downed cedar for tribal use • HYDROPS demo • How to handle timing/schedule for implementing HPMP • 4.2.1 Provide a Cultural Resources Enhancement Fund (CREF) MEETING EVALUATION Well-Dones • Got out on time. • Good attendance • Happy to have Larry back • Kelly C.’s curation presentation • Good food – Thanks Scott for the salmon! Changes for Next Time • Got started late (technical problems with the phone) What’s Hot? • We are! • Draft license article • Getting key draft documents reviewed Studies Status for Solution Team • All studies are on track! BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 6 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 TENTATIVE Agenda for February 10, 2004, 10:00-4:00 p.m. PSE Office Building, Mt. Vernon, WA 1. Introductions 2. Review January 13, 2004, Notes and Agenda 3. Action Items/Schedule • License article language approved? 4. TST Report 5. Begin PME review/mapping (will include ground disturbing within first five years of license) 6. HPMP comments 7. Update on TCP studies 8. Archaeology Report comments 9. HBS Report comments 10. Set agenda for March 9 meeting 11. Review Parking Lot 12. Evaluate Meeting 13. Plan celebration for May Ideas: • Have PSE host a celebration at the Upper Skagit Hotel? BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Page 7 Cultural and Historic Resources Working Group 01-13-04 Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  