 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group March 2nd, 2004 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Working Group meeting PSE, Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Mt. Vernon, WA 98273 AGENDA 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 2. Study Progress Update 3. Review R5, Aesthetic / Visual Resources draft Study Report 4. 1/9 PME Teamlet update 5. Review Draft Recreation License Articles 6. Set Agenda for March 22nd, 2004 7. Evaluate Meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group RESOLVE Meeting Final Notes March 2, 2004 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. PSE Office, Mount Vernon, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): email is andrew.hatfield@pse.com and phone number is (360) 853- 8341. PRESENT: Andy Hatfield (PSE), Dee Endelman (facilitator), Eli Asher (note taker), Jim Eychaner (IAC), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Mark Greenig (EDAW), Ardis Bynum (USFS--by phone), Lauri Vigue (WDFW--by phone), Ann Dunphy (USFS), Susan Rosebrough (NPS), and Brian Adams (Skagit County). March 2 Agenda: 1. Review Notes, Agenda and Action Items 2. Study Progress Update 3. Review R5, Aesthetic/Visual Resources Draft Study Report 4. 1/9 PME Teamlet Update 5. Review Draft Recreation License Articles 6. Set Agenda for March 22nd, 2004 New Actions 1. Andy—check on hard copies of R12-- has it been sent to working group? 2. Ann—Email R5 comments to Mark and working group. 3. Mark—touch base with Chris regarding making sure that R5 buttons up with descriptions in R16. 4. Andy—Check on whether work group proposal is being analyzed as an alternative—did we agree to do that? If so, follow up and inform Berger. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group 3/2/04 Page 1 of 3 5. Ardis—Forward PME/License Article email from Andy (dated 3/2/04) to workgroup. 6. All—Review Draft License Articles and PSE PME PDEA proposal and send comments to Andy by Monday, March 8. Andy will share comments with the working group. 7. Mark—send out redline version redline R5 version by Friday, March 19 to the working group. 8. Andy—send out hard copies of R5 to working group (following 3/19) and post it on the website. 9. Cary—Add clarification to RMP language 10. Ann—Send photographs of swim beach at Horseshoe Cove on Baker Lake to Chris Lossen for needs assessment. Report on Old Actions 1. All—were to send comments on R5 to Andy Hatfield by 2/9/04. Andy was to forward all comments to Mark Greenig. (No comments received as of 3/2/04). 2. All—read PME’s and sent comments to Andy by Friday, January 30. Andy forwarded the redrafts to the entire working group. 3. Andy—organized and convened meeting between the 2nd and 12th of February with Teamlet (Ann, Brian, Andy, Ardis) and Berger. Study Update R12 (Dispersed Site Inventory) is finished and is posted on the website. Chris was to send hard copies to working group. Several of us noted that we haven’t received them yet. Andy will check on this. Regarding R13, Chris has finished it and is sending it off within the next few days. R11/15 (capacity and suitability) and R16 (Needs Analysis) will be done within next few weeks. R5 (Aesthetics and Visual) Review Ann passed out and reviewed USFS comments to R5. We walked through Ann’s comments. The first comments related (under 1.3) to citations of relevant federal laws and regulations. We decided additional CFR cite related to Aesthetics and land use should be included. Regarding 2.1.3, Patrick wanted to make sure that there were references to National Park and Wilderness (Andy confirmed that they are already in the R5 report). Other comments related to clarification and minor errors. Ann asked if EDAW could also make some recommendations regarding the Glover Mountain Overlook area. Mark said he could make recommendations for upgrading the overlook area and it could be accessed by an additional trail (a foot path). Andy said PSE could agree to a dollar figure for trails and this could be one of them. We agreed that it was appropriate that the viewpoint be looked at for an upgrade. We discussed other areas of concern and clarification and Mark took notes on areas to amplify or amend. 3/8/04 and send comments to Andy. License Article Review We broke from the R5 review to review the draft License Articles and PSE’s proposed PMEs (for PDEA). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 2 of 3 We discussed the documents Andy handed out—the PSE-proposed PME’s for the PDEA (which PSE had to put together to meet timelines) and the draft License Articles which Carol Efrid wrote after the February 9 teamlet meeting. The draft License Articles match with PSE’s proposal, except there are no dollar figures. Concerns were voiced about the fact that the $27 million cost package was not included as an alternative in the PDEA since some members recalled agreement to include it. Andy will follow up on this. We discussed the contents of PSE proposal and how it related to Ardis’ and earlier drafts of PME’s. The PSE proposal contains all the components of Ardis’ redraft of the PME’s except ADA fishing platform and campground component of the Lake Shannon development. Concern was voice regarding this component being dropped. We agreed to review Draft License Articles and, if possible, PSE PME PDEA proposal by Monday, March 8 and send comments to Andy. R5 Discussion We picked up the R5 discussion. Mark asked further clarifying questions. He will take back the comments and make a draft final report. March 22 Meeting The group decided to cancel the March 22 meeting. The next Regular Working Group Meeting will be on April 26th. Materials Distributed • Final meeting notes from 1/26/04 working group meeting • USFS Comments on R-5 Aesthetics Visual Resource Project; • Draft License Articles; • PSE proposal for the PDEA for Recreational and Aesthetic Resources PMEs; • Recreation PME Cost spreadsheet (from Solution Team meeting of 2/24/04) Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group Page 3 of 3  