BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group June 28th, 2004 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Working Group meeting USFS Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest Headquarters 21905 64th Ave. West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043  AGENDA 1. Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items 2. Review Settlement Process, the AIP and work plan 3. Report from 6/15 Legal Working Group 4. Discuss next steps for rewriting the Recreation PMEs • How will actions within PMEs be prioritized to align with the funding level in the AIP? • How will PMEs be redrafted by 7/15? 5. Set Agenda for next meeting 6. Evaluate Meeting  Conference Call Phone Number (800) 582-8948 Participant Code *0529465*  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group  June 28, 2004 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. PSE Office, Mount Vernon, WA  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Andy Hatfield (PSE): andrew.hatfield@pse.com and (360) 853-8341. PRESENT: Andy Hatfield & Kris Olin (PSE); Pamela Krueger (Perkins Coie for PSE); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Ardis Bynum, Ann Dunphy & Rod Mace (USFS); Kendra Smith (Skagit County); Jim Eychaner (IAC); Susan Rosebrough (NPS--by phone); and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and Jamie Merrifield, note taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc.)  Note: No Meeting on July 26, 2004 Next (tentative) Meeting: August 9, 2004 at Forest Service Building, Mountlake Terrace, 9:00 – 3:00 JUNE 28 AGENDA 1. Review Notes, Agenda and Action Items 2. Studies Update 3. Review Settlement Process, the AIP and work plan 4. Report from 6/15 Legal Working Group 5. Discuss next steps for rewriting the Recreational PMEs a. How will actions within PMEs be prioritized to align with the funding level in the AIP? b. How will PMEs be redrafted by 7/15? 6. Set Agenda for July 26 meeting 7. Evaluate Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS • Andy – Verify with Dawn that all recreation studies have been sent out. • Andy – Verify with Kristen that studies are on the website. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group 6/28/04 Page 1 of 6   • • • • • • • • • • • • •  Ardis – Establish the legal description of the boundaries (for I & E purposes re: safety and recreation - 2.1). Andy – Get example of prioritization criteria for hazard elimination (motorized water craft) from USACE - 2.1. Andy & Ann – Review detail of costs together to reconcile 2.3 with the AIP, by July 9. Jim – Bring daughter’s wedding pictures to next meeting. Ann – Get Andy data related to 2.5.2 (5-year historical USFS campgrounds revenue), by July 2. Ann & Andy – Check “NPV-ability” of implementation schedules related to 2.5.5 (Baker Resort), by July 2. Ardis – Get list of “project-related roads” to clarify 6.4. Andy – Update numbers and names to match changes made by Policy Team. Ardis – Draft text for 6.5 PMEs for comment/review by July 2. (NPV is approx. $824,000 for information and $860,000 for interpretation.) Pamela – Send to group draft edited Recreation License Articles for review/comment, by July 9. ALL – Reply with comments to Pamela’s edited articles by July 14. Pamela – Integrate Ann & Andy’s work (as defined in these action items) by July 14. Pamela – Email out summary of comments by July 16.  REPORT ON OLD ACTION ITEMS • Andy checked on hard copies of R12 to see if it had been sent to working group. • Ann emailed R5 comments to Mark and working group. • Mark touched base with Chris regarding making sure that R5 buttons up with descriptions in R16. • Andy checked on whether work group proposal is being analyzed as an alternative. • Ardis forwarded PME/License Article email from Andy (dated 3/2/04) to workgroup. • All reviewed Draft License Articles and PSE PME PDEA proposal and sent comments to Andy by Monday, March 8. Andy shared comments with the working group. • Mark sent out redline version redline R5 version by Friday, March 19 to the working group. • Andy sent out hard copies of R5 to working group (following 3/19) and posted it on the website. • Ann sent photographs of swim beach at Horseshoe Cove on Baker Lake to Chris Lawson for needs assessment. STUDIES UPDATE Andy reported that all of the Recreational studies are now complete. CDs and copies are being sent out to working group members. These will be posted on the Baker Relicensing website. The Lake Shannon feasibility study (showing all 4 options) will be out the week of July 5. SETTLEMENT PROCESS AIP/handshake agreement was reached in May. At the last policy team meeting (June14), the group walked through Attachment A of the PDEA and made high-level changes to support the AIP/Handshake Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 28, 2004 Page 2 of 6   Agreement. They also reviewed a Work Plan showing major milestones between now and Sept 30 when PSE will submit the Settlement Agreement. The work is now in technical groups’ hands to craft the technical detail the Legal WG will need to describe/translate the AIP/handshake agreement into license articles in the language FERC needs. LEGAL WORKING GROUP UPDATE Legal Working Group is proceeding in earnest with an aggressive meeting schedule; they have a lot to get done this summer. They need information that is relevant to each PME in order to convert them into license articles. The Recreational Working Group needs to provide the technical detail to support the AIP by July 15. The Legal Working Group will translate the Recreational PMEs into license article language on July 21. The Legal Working Group is looking for objectives, justification and specific criteria for each action item, within the intended funding limit, in order to include in the license article language. PME DEVELOPMENT Ardis reported that she, Ann, Rod, and Jim met last Thursday (June 24) to take a stab at describing what the license articles might look like within the scope of the AIP. We discussed / clarified these draft materials to ensure that our intentions get preserved in the license articles. 2.0 Recreation Management Plan The plan will recite the articles it will include. The articles will identify what is to be done and will reference or incorporate the implementation schedules. 2.1.0 Summary of Water Recreation Safety Ardis reported that the group ended up with 3 components: 1. Increasing awareness of safety issues, natural resource concerns, boating and recreational behavior expectations. Develop information pieces (e.g., tear map) so that people coming to recreate responsibly would have this information with them (rather than it just being posted). This map should show sufficient detail that the public can see the trails/roads, parks, and campgrounds, within context of the major recreation areas. –Within 2 Years 2. Swim beach safety, including campgrounds and boat launches which present additional safety issues. – Within 3 Years 3. Reservoir hazard management. Based on available information, stump removal does not appear to be an imminent issue reservoir-wide. There may at some time be a need to mitigate/alleviate stumps or other hazards (primarily to motorized water craft) that may become exposed. The focus would be on the immediate vicinity (within 100 yards) of put in / take out access points and possibly bank areas, including the boat launch at Lake Shannon. Monitoring starts in the first year * Need to look at hazard alleviation guidelines set in other proceedings. 2.1.3 Law Enforcement Law enforcement plan (as a coordinating function) would be developed within 2 years. The overall aim (implementation actions) for this is resources protection through enforcement and deterrent presence. There are some efficiencies to be gained different jurisdictions working together to reduce overlap in areas where there are overlapping authorities. The Licensee will facilitate and invite all law enforcement entities to come together to coordinate coverage. There would be an MOU among the parties and a Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 28, 2004 Page 3 of 6   contractual agreement between the Licensee and the parties. 2.2 Baker Lake Dispersed Recreation Management Dispersed recreation includes drive-up camping, hike/bike in, and boating. The intent of this section is resource management as well as mitigation of social and/or resource impacts of extended use at specific sites. This is divided into two phases with several components. Dispersed sites will be monitored to identify use levels and trends. If phase one does not adequately manage dispersed recreation, additional measures may be taken separately or collectively as outlined in phase two; issues/events that trigger phase 2 will be vetted at the BRCC (Recreation subgroup, at least initially). –Site hardening is to be done within 3 years of license issuance. 2.3 Aesthetics Management $276,848 NPV is total. “Normal/routine maintenance” shouldn’t be charged to this. This item would be a means of providing funding for a general objective. Question: How much of this money is for project vs. non-project facilities? Ann & Andy will resolve this. 2.4.1 Create New Trails The motivation to do this comes from state-wide surveys on recreation trends. On forest service land, the idea is for the licensee to make funds available to provide multi-season, multi-use, non-motorized (and barrier-free to the extent possible) trails to connect recreation population and activity hubs … which helps to guide usage and protect resources. Implement in years 3, 4, & 17 (depending on NPV)? 2.4.2 Maintain Existing Trails and Trailheads The aim is for licensee to make funds available for the normal/routine maintenance of existing trails and trailheads at or near the project. 2.5 Developed Recreation Facilities Licensee will develop a sub-plan linked to Meaningful Measures on a site-by-site basis. The aim is to provide adequate recreational facilities to meet user demand (taking into account what the land can provide). 2.5.1 Bayview Campground The cost to licensee is capped at $469,208 in three specific years, depending on NPV. 2.5.2 Operation & Maintenance of USFS Campgrounds Aim is to provide ‘full service’ levels (Meaningful Measures). Estimate of $57,272/year is based on historical data. Question: Capped vs. delivered? Ann & Andy will meet to resolve this. 2.5.3 Provide Access to and Development at Lake Shannon This fulfills 18CFR 2.0 to provide access to Lake Shannon. The state recommends, as a minimum, boat launch (following accepted standards, e.g. State Organization for Boating Access), parking, and day-use restroom; costs up to $1 million NPV. If there is no plan by year 10, Licensee is to provide a suitable equivalent public opportunity for water access. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 28, 2004 Page 4 of 6   Lake Shannon - Dispersed Licensee will monitor/document dispersed use at Lake Shannon every 6 years. 2.5.4 Kulshan Campground Improvements Currently, this item is not funded in the AIP. It was discussed that FERC might require licensee to maintain and operate it as listed in Appendix B of PDEA. 2.5.5 Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment The aim of this is to establish licensee activities subsequent to termination of the Special Use Authorization. We need to understand implications of NPV and develop an implementation schedule. (Ann & Andy will address.) 2.5.8 USFS Future Developed Campgrounds The aim of this is to ensure adequate campsite/campground facilities in the event of increasing demand. The Licensee and USFS will review/monitor the average usage of USFS campgrounds in the Baker Lake Basin; an average use of 60% during July & August in two consecutive years will trigger planning and development of additional campsites or campgrounds, within external land availability / use constraints. Licensee contribution is capped at $306,865 NPV. We need to define the terms more clearly. 6.4 Access and Travel Management The intent is for the licensee to maintain public access to utility-owned lands via FS Road 1106. Ardis will provide list of “project-related roads” 6.5 Provide Informational, Interpretive and Educational Services and Facilities The aim is to provide Informational, Interpretive and Educational through information, people and facilities relative to the project area. The I&E Plan would be a stand-alone document (separate from RMP). Coming Soon: USFS will craft text of 6.5 PMEs for group review/comment Discuss next steps for rewriting the Recreational PMEs: See Action Items above. Continued work will be done on articles: 2.1; 3.2; 2.5.2; 2.5.5; 6.4; and 6.5. Pamela will send out an edited version of Recreational License Articles by July 9 for all to review and comment. We will email her our comments by July 14. Pamela will track our comments by person and date. She will also incorporate Ann and Andy’s work by the 14th. She will get everyone’s comments out by July 16, prior to the Legal WG meeting on July 20. Note: The July 26, 2004 meeting has been cancelled. We have reserved August 9, 2004, from 9:00 – 3:00 at the Forest Service Building in Mountlake Terrace for meeting as needed (if directed to do so by the Legal WG). Evaluate Meeting Well Dones: Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 28, 2004 Page 5 of 6   • • • •  Good participation, forthcoming discussion and free-flowing information Good work done by USFS & Jim Eychaner last week! Welcome Kendra, Pamela, Kris, Rod Didn’t try to renegotiate (stuck to the agreement)  To Do Differently Next Time: • Ran over Handouts • Potential License Articles for Recreation (from June 24 Ardis, Ann, Rod, and Jim meeting) • 2.2 Baker Lake Dispersed Recreation Management • Attachment A – AIP/Handshake Agreement  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Recreation Resources Working Group June 28, 2004 Page 6 of 6    2004recreational20040628.pdf en 