BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Elk Teamlet Meeting November 14th, 2005 (9:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-297-7238, ID: 225370, Password: 7724 (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA 1. Review any appropriate action items from November 10th, 2005 meeting 2. Discuss purpose of the elk teamlet and process 3. Land acquisition update Contact with land owner of initial parcel 4. Elk Chapter of the TRMP 5. Parcel acquisition process List of potential elk properties Parcel selection process Expenditures process 6. Pre-acquisition studies, due diligence, etc. 7. Other? 8. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes November 14, 2005 9:00 am - 12:00 pm  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs and Doug Woodworth (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Lauri Vigue by phone (WDFW); Bob Kuntz (NPS); Jason Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe); Chris Madsen (NWIFC); Don Gay (USFS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator / note-taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc).  NEXT MEETING DATES Elk Teamlet Meeting: December 16, 19 or 20 ... specific date and time TBD by the availability of WDFW folks Location: Forest Service Mountlake Terrace Office or WDFW Mill Creek Office TRIG Meeting: February 7, 2006 from 9:00 to 3:00 at Forest Service Office  AGENDA TOPICS Review Notes, Agenda Purpose & Process of the Elk teamlet Land Acquisition Update Parcel Acquisition Process Elk Chapter of the TRMP Evaluate meeting, Set next meeting & agenda  NEW ACTION ITEMS Lauri <ad> invite Bill and Mike to next Elk teamlet meeting Tony <ad> set next meeting date and time based on WDFW's availability Tony <ad> work with Joetta to create maps for next Elk teamlet meeting Tony <ad> look for Don's handout related to 300 acres and 1,437 elk forage equiv. (section 4.2)  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 14, 2005  Page 1 of 3   Marty <ad> send everyone info about alternate plans for forest practices  ELK TEAMLET PURPOSE AND PROCESS This group will start with a focus on land acquisition. Specifically, PSE wants this group's guidance/input on how the land acquisition money will be spent and accounted for. Later, this group will focus on sitespecific management activities. To begin with, meeting frequency will be about once a month, as needed, and may be conducted by conference calls when appropriate. Minutes will be distributed on paper rather than email to maintain the integrity of the land acquisition process.  LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Mike Mueller (RMEF) and the owner of the property met two weeks ago; the owner gave Mike a tour of the property. He indicated that he is not interested in selling due to an interest in having a working retirement and leaving a legacy to his heirs. Mike shared with him several options other than sale of the property (conservation easements, life estates, etc), and the owner was open to those options. Mike will be in touch with him again after Thanksgiving. This may be a six-month process due to the sensitivity of the negotiations; Mike and Tony suggest we discuss the possibility of buying other property with the money we have now and consider this property, if it is available, with the next installment of land acquisition money. Tony will keep us informed of progress along the way.  PARCEL ACQUISITION PROCESS The group discussed the criteria to be used in advance of land acquisition: Regional areas of focus (areas closest to project impact): South of county line, north of Hwy 20, west of Lk. Shannon, east of western edges of Baker River/Grandy Creek drainages Seasonal needs of elk (aiming to address areas of greatest need): Winter, transition, summer ranges Elk uses (aiming to address areas of greatest need): Forage, calving, travel corridors. The license article only addresses forage. We should probably talk more about what this bullet means and if it is valid. It may need to be stated more explicitly. Proximity to existing elk lands (Question: does this mean current elk use areas? Historic use areas? Or other areas actively managed for elk?) Avoid areas WDFW identifies as generating animal damage complaints on agricultural lands  Our goal is to do the most good for the elk herd with the dollars we have. We discussed starting with an evaluation of the current elk habitat conditions to identify areas of greatest need. Use a GIS analysis of the land, starting with known current and historic elk use areas, then evaluate parcels with the site conditions that will help us accomplish our goals. If needed, a second GIS analysis can be done of areas that have not been historically within, or near, elk use areas.  The group discussed an interest in taking a holistic approach to the use of the land acquisition and management dollars over the entire life of the settlement agreement. We noted that it is important to look at full potential rather than just historical use, as historical use has largely been determined by development and human activity. Some lands (such as the lower plateau area) may have the capacity for greater potential if managed appropriately.  Bill Hebner, Region 4 Captain, WDFW, would be a great resource for evaluating areas that are currently generating the greatest number of animal damage complaints and could be a great resource in considering  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 14, 2005  Page 2 of 3   possible sites. The group would like to invite Bill and/or Mike Davison (District Wildlife Biologist, Region 4, WDFW) to the next elk teamlet meeting.  We will also want to consider the cost/benefit ratio of large conservation easements vs. smaller acquisitions as we look at the getting the greatest possible elk benefit for each dollar spent. Another consideration would be looking at adjacent lands that are already being managed for elk. Ultimately, our options will depend on what land is available and at what cost.  Tony will work with Joetta to create large maps for the next Elk Teamlet meeting. These maps will show: Boundary / Section lines, Hydrological areas, Roads, Topography, Cover type, Elk forage ranking, Ortho photos, and Ownership <ad> Federal, DNR, Private Ownership (possibly separate). Later: Damage areas, Elk use patterns, and Zoning information maps will also be helpful.  Next Steps: Develop the maps as listed above, meet as a teamlet with the elk folks from WDFW (or work with Lauri to get their input if they aren't available for a meeting), revise maps as needed, and give to RMEF and PSE's land folks to start identifying available parcels. Goal: accomplish this by the end of the year. We would also like our real estate specialists (RMEF & PSE) to keep track of the disposition of the Crown Pacific lands.  TRMP ELK CHAPTER The group walked through a review of the Elk Chapter of the Terrestrial Resource Management Plan. Jamie made real-time edits to capture feedback from Elk Teamlet members.  NEXT STEPS Use the maps and WDFW input to begin to identify parcels of interest Follow progress of current land acquisition negotiations and the disposition of Crown Pacific lands  HANDOUTS Agenda  MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well Great attendance Marty: thanks for the food :) Got through a lot Facilitation  What to Do Differently Missed Lyn Confirm the conference line Meeting ran long  AGENDA FOR NEXT ELK TEAMLET MEETING December 16, 19, or 20 ... specific date and time TBD by availability of WDFW folks Location: Mountlake Terrace or Mill Creek 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. Land acquisition update 3. Review maps 4. Discuss land acquisition considerations with Bill & Mike (WDFW)  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 14, 2005  Page 3 of 3   5. Discuss leases and damage management as enhancements from elk funds (WDFW questions) 6. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting date and agenda  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 14, 2005  Page 4 of 3    2005trig20051114_elk.pdf en 