 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources September 23, 2005 (12:30 p.m. -2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-297-7238, ID: 246832, Password: 6010 after noon for botanical teamlet. (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA Review notes/agenda/action items from August 8th meeting Review draft management plan materials for proposed botanical license articles: Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan 1. Results of field trip to rare plant sites- August 17th 2. Revised draft SSPMP (draft SSPMP file) 3. Draft outlines of site-specific management plans for all species and sites (6 appendix files) 4. Discuss map products Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan 1. Draft species and site prioritization appendix, with priorities/5-yr objectives table (decision matrix) (prioritization file) 2. Draft site-specific management plans for herb Robert, Canada thistle, bull thistle, smooth hawkweed, and invasive knotweeds (five draft management plan files) 3. Discuss map products 4. Draft revised weed sighting form (sighting form file) 5. NOTE: full draft of the IWMP not being sent out this for this meeting, but will be sent out prior to the October 13, TRIG meeting Set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources September 23, 2005 (12:30 p.m. -2:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office - Library 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com Present at Meeting: Laura Potash (USFS), Don Gay (USFS, by phone for discussion of Article 508 section on new parcel acquisition), Jason Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates) Review notes/agenda/action items from August 8th meeting Review draft management plan materials for proposed botanical license articles: Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan 1. Results of field trip to rare plant sites- August 17th 2. Revised draft SSPMP (draft SSPMP file) 3. Draft outlines of site-specific management plans for all species and sites (6 appendix files) 4. Discuss map products Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan 1. Draft species and site prioritization appendix, with priorities/5-yr objectives table (decision matrix) (prioritization file) 2. Draft site-specific management plans for herb Robert, Canada thistle, bull thistle, smooth hawkweed, and invasive knotweeds (five draft management plan files) 3. Discuss map products 4. Draft revised weed sighting form (sighting form file) 5. NOTE: full draft of the IWMP not being sent out this for this meeting, but will be sent out prior to the October 13, TRIG meeting Set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 New Action Items: Kathy will provide copies of handouts for today’s meeting to Laurel Shiner, WCNWCB. Laura will provide copies of data sheets for this year’s visits to the Peltigera pacifica site on FR 1152 and for original and this year’s visits to the Platanthera sparsiflora site. Laura will provide suggestions for draft RFP for baseline population status of the C. flava site. Tony will prepare an RFP with the intent of getting a firm on contract in time for the summer field season in 2006. Kathy will update weed database and GIS coverage (via Joetta) to the agreed date format agreed upon with the USFS. Once the PSE GIS weed coverage is reviewed and updated, Kathy will prepare a crosswalk between the USFS codes and PSE codes. Kathy will request necessary information from Laura at that time (probably mid to late October). Tony will attempt to have a Project Initiation form for the FSC site, complete with photos, ready for the October 13 meeting. Report on old Action Items: TRIG meeting rescheduled to September 23, 2005. August botanical meeting handouts provided to Laurel Shiner. Decision matrix presented in today’s handout, Appendix 8-1, Table 8-1-11. New discussion included in today’s handout of draft IWMP. Weed sighting crosswalk postponed, transferred to Kathy Meeting Discussion Article 508: Don Gay called in to discuss language on acquisition of new parcels. He suggested language changes that would result in new parcels not being added to the IWMP, or being added only by TRIG consensus. Tony felt that this suggestion may not be consistent with language in Articles 502, 503, 504, 505, and 508. Kathy noted that by evaluating a parcel through the procedures included in the draft IWMP, the TRIG would have flexibility to design a site-specific treatment plan appropriate for each parcel (with the possible exception of any weeds with state-mandated control requirements). Each treatment plan is site- specific, and will be approved by the TRIG. This note will be added to the existing draft language. The TRIG members will receive a full draft of the IWMP in the next week or so, in preparation for the October 13 meeting, and discussion of any part of the draft plan can be raised at that meeting. Prioritization process: The draft text to accompany the prioritization process was presented as Appendix 8-1, including the ‘decision matrix’ in Table 8-1-11 showing how the species and site priorities are translated into guidelines for 5-year management objectives in terms of implementation of initial actions. Site-specific management plants: Laura requested that the species and site priorities both be included on the site-specific sheets, for reference purposes. This will be incorporated into the next drafts. Laura recommended that treatment timing statements use language such as ‘as early as, or as late as, or a general season’, rather than a specific date such as first week of August. This is because phenology (and thus, BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 timing of treatment) can vary from year to year. Laura requested that the PSE database be updated to use a consistent numbering protocol; this will be done by Kathy and Joetta in the future (necessary, but not urgent). Specific map products to be included in the IWMP and the site-specific plans were discussed and agreed upon in concept. Maps in the IWMP will include a map of the Plan Area (based on survey area for T6 study), a map of weed occurrences (based on T6 occurrence map). Site-specific (or weed zone) maps based on orthophotos will be included in the site-specific management plans. The method for tracking sites in the future was discussed briefly. It is proposed that species with large numbers of occurrences will be managed by grouping those occurrences into ‘zones’; the initial treatments will cover all originally-documented sites, plus any additional sites that have developed since the surveys within that zone. Monitoring will be performed on more of a ‘zone’ basis, than an individual plant basis. Other species, such as ivy and tansy ragwort, at this time appear to be best tracked by individual sites. Article 509: The latest draft of the SSPMP was distributed with copies of the site-specific plans. Specific map products were discussed and agreed upon. The SSPMP will include a map of the Plan Area, based on the survey map from the T16 study. The site-specific plans will include a general rare plant occurrence map (based on the T16 occurrence map) as well as individual site maps on orthophoto base. Article 510: Tony noted that budget projections for next year include funds for some limited site investigation at the Carex flava site. This work is needed in order to prepare a detailed management/study plan for the site. The team agreed that the most useful task would be to assess the baseline population of C. flava as a starting point for monitoring. This would be best accomplished by an expert in population assessment of these types of plants. Laura recommended that PSE issue an RFP for the work to one or more firms, and offered to provide suggested technical specifications to be incorporated. Handouts: Draft SSPMP with site-specific management plan drafts for 6 species Draft IWMP with Appendix 8-1, Prioritization Process, and site-specific management plan drafts for herb Robert, Canada thistle, bull thistle, and reed canarygrass. Draft revised weed sighting form for new sightings on non-NFS lands. Next Meeting: The TRIG will meet on October 13, 2005 at the USFS Mountlake Terrace office from 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. At that time, the need for another botanical teamlet meeting will be considered. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  