BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources April 27, 2005 (9:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.) Puget Sound Energy Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting)  AGENDA Review draft management plan outlines for proposed botanical license articles: Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan 1. Project initiation, prefield review procedures and forms 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan 3. Draft outline of site-specific management plan Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan 1. NEPA discussion 2. Prioritization forms 3. Revised draft annotated outline of plan 4. Discussion of goals and objectives for reed canarygrass sites Article 510, Carex flava Management Plan 1. Discussion of funding mechanisms 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan Set date and agenda for next meeting  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Technical Meeting for Botanical Resources April 27th, 2005 9:00am until Noon PSE Mount Vernon Business Office 1700 E. College Way Conference Call Line: 1-800-582-8948, code *0529465* (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting and he will set up the conference call line)  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT AT MEETING Laura Potash (USFS), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates), Laurel Shiner (Whatcom County Noxious Weed Control Board) Agenda Review Agenda Review draft management plant outlines for proposed botanical license articles: Article 509, Special Status Plant Management Plan 1. Project Initiation, pre-field review procedures and forms 2. Revised Draft annotated outline of plan 3. Draft outline of site-specific management plan Article 508, Noxious Weed Management Plan 1. NEPA discussion 2. Prioritization forms 3. Revised draft annotated outline of plan 4. Discussion of goals and objectives for reed canarygrass sites Article 510, Carex flava Management Plan 1. Discussion of funding mechanisms 2. Revised draft annotated outline of plan Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, April 27, 2005  Page 1 of 4   Set date, place, agenda for the next TRIG botanical teamlet meeting New Action Items Tony to make copies of the April 2005 MBS Weed EA and return original to Laura Laurel will provide density ranking information for infested sites to Kathy Laura will get contact name(s) for the Carex working group to Tony and Kathy Kathy to provide draft language in SSPMP section 3.5 for what do we do if we can’t avoid a rare plant when conducting a ground disturbing project. Tony to contact Steve Jennison about WDNR contact for the SSPMP and C. flava plans review Tony to review potential for impact of anchor points for the FSC project, to determine need for rare plant survey, and get back to Laura on it. It was agreed that Tony and Laura will conduct a rare plant survey of the site this summer at the appropriate timing. Tony still needs to set up meeting with Steve Reutebach from the USFS PNW Research Office to determine the process for contacting though the FS, and the associated overhead costs. Report on old Action Items Tony to review potential for impact of anchor points for the FSC project, to determine need for rare plant survey, and get back to Laura on it. It was agreed that Tony and Laura will conduct a rare plant survey of the site this summer at the appropriate timing. Laura sent to Kathy and Tony a Project Initiation form that we can modify for our plans. Kathy updated weed list for project (from State, County, and FS lists). Laura provided Weed treatment rankings from the Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie Weed EA. Laura contacted Carl Corey about several NEPA questions about coverage of treatments and received guidance from both Carl and Walt Dortch. Tony still needs to set up meeting with Steve Reutebach from the USFS PNW Research Office to determine the process for contacting though the FS, and the associated overhead costs.  Meeting Discussion We went over the action items from last meeting and provided updated. The teamlet the remainder of the meeting reviewing and commenting on the draft management plan outlines and forms, starting with Article 509. Article 509: We went over the updated Project Initiation and Pre-field review forms and provided comments to Kathy. We felt that it is important to get some input from the WDNR (and we are required to consult with them according to the license article), so Tony will contact Steve Jennison to see who will be reviewing this from the WDNR. The SSPMP outline was reviewed again, with specific comments. For section 3.2, new parcels, we only need to fill out a Project Initiation form if a project is proposed on these lands. In section 3.4, all sighting forms shall be submitted to the WNHP (WDNR) and on Federal Lands to the MBS National Forest botanist (Laura!). In section 3.5, Kathy is going to provide draft language on what we will do if we can’t avoid a rare plant when conducting a ground disturbing project, and we will review in the next draft. We also reviewed the first draft of a specific management plan for a plant (Usnea longissima), and provided comments on protecting microhabitat for sites and for protecting conditions Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, April 27, 2005  Page 2 of 4   that will allow the species to persist on the site. Article 508: Kathy presented an updated weed list, and we discusses treatment levels by county and Federal rules. Kathy will add better treatment definitions to the list for each species. We talked about taking St. Johnswort and common tansy off the list, and Laurel said that was fine. The two species were listed as Class C Selected by Whatcom County, but they are lower priority for being treated. Kathy also handed out a weed prioritization scoresheet, and we discussed the ranking and categories. With input from Laurel (from Whatcom County’s weed infestation prioritization form), Kathy will update this sheet for the next draft. We briefly discussed the NEPA issue. Basically, we need to make sure all the weed management information that we need from the PDEA makes it into the FERC EA. The FERC draft EA should be out in May. We reviewed the updated draft outline of the Integrated Weed Management Plan. We need to add to the plan a section for the process to add new sightings to the management plan, including determining what the threshold is for conducting a sighting report and for a new site to be added. Likely we should prioritize, such as, new Class A and B designates are on automatically. Kathy presented drafts of the English ivy and reed canarygrass management plans. Ranking these by species and by site will follow the scoring from the prioritization process. Article 510: Kathy presented and updated draft of the Carex flava management plan. We discussed the timing of the initial studies and treatments. It is likely that we will contract with someone to survey and map the site in the first year, then in years 2 and 3 we would like to have a Graduate student conduct the field trials and initial treatments. There was general agreement to this approach, so Kathy is developing the plan along those lines. We also talked about perhaps using someone from the Carex working group to do the initial site mapping, and Laura will work on getting a contact person for us to begin talking to. Other: We will likely be conducting rare plant site visits in July (for FSC anchor site) or later in summer at the Carex flava site to help with development of the plans. Also, Laura asked if we could begin to stockpile weed-free mulch for use in our activities, and it was thought that perhaps from our Legacy wood or LWD articles we may be able to create some wood chip mulch. Next Meeting The next meeting will be on June 8th at PSE Mount Vernon business office, and Tony will secure the meeting location and send out the notice and agenda. We will be reporting on the action items and look at updated management plan outlines and hopefully feedback from the May 13th TRIG meeting. Handouts Draft Pre-field Review Worksheet for Botany Draft Project Initiation Form, Baker River Project Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, April 27, 2005  Page 3 of 4   Updated draft outline, Special Status Plant Management Plan (SSPMP) Draft Management Plan for Usnea longissima 9/24/03 draft of “Carex flava site management at Baker Lake” paper Article 510 Carex flava Draft outline, Carex flava Management Plan Article 508 Noxious Weeds Draft outline, Integrated Weed Management Plan Agenda for next Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting June 8th, 2005 at PSE Mount Vernon business office 9:00 a.m. - Noon Nutritious snacks (or not!) will be provided. 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from April 27th meeting. 2. Provide update on action items 3. Review updated draft outlines and determine next steps in development of draft plans 4. Discuss feedback from TRIG meeting 5. Evaluate meeting and set agenda and location for next meeting  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG botanical teamlet meeting, April 27, 2005  Page 4 of 4    2005trig20050427_bot.pdf en 