BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting October 13th, 2005 (9:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.) U.S. Forest Service Office 21905 64th Avenue West Mountlake Terrace, WA 98043 425-744-3236 (office # 425-775-9702) Conference Call Line: 1-866-297-7238, ID: 225370, Password: 2980 until noon, then ID: 9547157, Password: 0941 after noon until 3pm. (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from August 23, 2005 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, including schedule for DEIS 3. Land acquisition update Formation of Land Acquisition Teamlet Pre-acquisition surveys, due diligence, etc. 4. Terrestrial Resource Management Plan (TRMP) review 5. Other? 6. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes October 13, 2005 9:00 am - 3:00 pm  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Marty Vaughn and Doug Woodworth (Biota-Pacific); Fayette Krause (TNC); Bob Nelson (Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates); Lauri Vigue (WDFW), Stan Walsh by phone (SRSC); Jason Joseph (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe); Laura Potash and Don Gay (USFS); Tony Fuchs and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator, and Jamie Riche, note-taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc).  NEXT MEETING DATES TRIG Meeting: November 10, 2005 from 9:00 to 3:00 at Forest Service Office Elk Teamlet Meeting: November 14, 2005 from 9:00 to 2:00 at Forest Service Office  AGENDA TOPICS Review Notes, Agenda Review recent BRICC activities/DEIS Schedule Update Land Acquisition Update TRMP Review Evaluate meeting, Set next meeting & agenda  EXPRESSION OF THE DAY: "Where there's a will there's a may." -- Marty Vaughn  NEW ACTION ITEMS Tony <ad> Let Chris, Todd, and Jason know about the Nov. 14 Elk teamlet meeting. Tony <ad> Send Bob Nelson hard copies instead of electronic copies going forward. Tony <ad> Send out email to all re: loon platforms and osprey nest locations for all to review. Tony <ad> Get desirable locations for Elk from Chris Madsen.  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, October 13, 2005  Page 1 of 4   Tony <ad> Discuss non-native wording with Fayette. All <ad> In reviewing the TRMP land acquisition sections, consider how to list primary and secondary decision criteria. All <ad> Review Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington: http://www.ecy.wa.gov/biblio/0406025.html. Consider if this is what we want to use this as a preacquisition survey. All <ad> Review Methods of Assessing Wetland Functions <ad> Riverine and Depressional Wetlands in the Lowlands of Western Washington: http://www.ecy.wa.gov/biblio/99115.html. Consider if this is a more detailed assessment we may want to use. Keep in mind what would help us with a Habitat Assessment Implementation Plan. All <ad> Send additional comments on Ch. 1-5 of TRMP to Marty. Elk People <ad> By Nov. 3, let Tony know if any questions/suggestions you have re: guidelines in preparation for Nov. 14 Elk Teamlet meeting. If you make comments directly on the Elk Section of the TRMP, please save that section as a separate document and send to Tony, smaller files are easier to share. The agenda will include "Lovers' Ranch" acquisition and TRMP review. Lauri <ad> Run proposed relevant TRMP language by Washington Heritage Program rep. Lauri <ad> Get damage complaint information/maps (showing distance between areas of potential animal damage conflict) from Regional Office. Laura <ad> Send "hideous" weed wording to Marty.  PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Tony <ad> Form Elk Acquisition Teamlet w/ members: Bob N., Chris M., Don G., Jason J., Todd W., Lauri V., Marty (Joetta of R-2 to do GIS support). Nov. 14 has been tentatively set as the date for that meeting. It remains to be decided whether or not this will be a meeting or a conference call. Tony <ad> Talk w/ Team Leaders of other groups to see that their re-vegetation plans acknowledge that, on federal lands, native plants should be "locally-derived."  REVIEW RECENT BRICC ACTIVITIES Lyn let the group know that the BRICC (Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee) has not met since June because they are still awaiting the DEIS from FERC. Steve Hawking recently published FERC's revised timeline with us. The DEIS will be out in November. We aren't clear if there will be a 30 or 45day comment period for the document. The next BRICC meeting will be Dec. 13. The purpose of that meeting will be to walk through the DEIS and formulate initial comments.  CZMA CONSISTENCY Cary gave us an update on where things are with PSE's request for a Coastal Zone Consistency determination from Skagit County. The only two features we have in unincorporated Skagit County that are proposed in a shorelines area are the loon nests and osprey platforms. Skagit County denied a shoreline exemption that would have expedited shoreline consistency. PSE appealed this decision and the Hearing Examiner ruled in favor of PSE. If this decision is further appealed, Cary suggested it may delay PSE's receipt of the license by several years. If we located the loon nests on Baker Lake and put the additional osprey nest on Lake Shannon within Whatcom County or within the boundary of the Town of Concrete, that would help expedite the license as it would remove these project enhancements from Skagit County's jurisdiction. Concern was raised during this discussion that placement of the osprey nest structure in Whatcom County may not meet the intent of the article. This area likely has suitable nesting  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, October 13, 2005  Page 2 of 4   habitat. Further investigation of nesting habitat quality will be necessary before this potential solution is implemented. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Tony reported that Mike Mueller of the RMEF has come out and met with Tony, Bob, and the PSE Real Estate representative (Terry Albright). He also made contact by phone with the owner of the property we are interested in. Mike will be meeting with him in person by the end of October. During that visit, Mike will let the owner know that the RMEF has a partner and will discuss the possibilities of what might be done with the land. The owner doesn't live n the property. He is in his mid 70s and is concerned with being able to leave something to his heirs. Tony will keep us informed of progress along the way. TRMP REVIEW Marty led us through a review of the October 3 draft of the Terrestrial Resource Management Plan. Jamie made real-time edits to capture feedback from TRIG members. Ultimately, we will submit a final draft TRMP to FERC by Oct. 31, 2006. We made it though about half of the TRMP, and will need an additional meeting to cover the remainder of the plan. NEXT STEPS The revised draft in red-lined, strike-out mode will be distributed to all along with the meeting notes after the next TRIG meeting when we finish the walk through of the current draft. In the meantime, Marty will flesh out sections according to what we assign to him during our discussions. HANDOUTS Agenda Representative List TRIG September 23 Meeting Notes October 3, 2005 Draft of TRMP PARKING LOT Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit Need definition for or synonym for "desirable non-native" ... "non-hideous non native"? Easement vs. Ownership relative to license articles MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well Appreciate the Red Bull and the water! Support from all ... Way to hang in there! Stan on phone Process worked well (Jamie on computer) What to Do Differently Get representation from Washington Natural Heritage Program Missed Lou Ellyn Ran over time  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, October 13, 2005  Page 3 of 4   AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING November 10, 2005 at Forest Service Office 9:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. 1. Welcome 2. Brief BRICC/FERC Update 3. Continue review of TRMP 4. Evaluate meeting  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 TRIG Final Meeting Notes, October 13, 2005  Page 4 of 4    2005trig20051013.pdf en 