 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda June 20, 2007 10:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Agenda 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Field trip to Spawning Beaches Meet at Komo Kulshan Restrooms (10:00) Travel to spawning beaches (10:10-10:45) Review spawning beaches (10:15-11:15) Return to Baker Lodge (11:15-12:00) 3. Lunch 4. Review Action Items 5. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee 6. “Gulper” Field Visit Notes 7. Elk Land Purchase Proposal Update 8. Concrete Museum Paper Project 9. Evaluate Meeting 10. Define Next Steps BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting June 20, 2007 10:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. On-site visit and Baker Lodge, Concrete, WA Draft Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Heather Miller (HRA), James Roberts (Sauk-Suiattle Tribe), and John Boggs (Concrete Heritage Museum) PRESENT BY CONFERENCE CALL: No phone capability April 18 Agenda: 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches Visit 3. Concrete Museum Newspaper Project 4. Evaluate Meeting 1. Welcome and Introductions 2. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches Tour, June 20, 2007 (submitted by Heather Miller, HRA) Baker CRAG members Elizabeth Dubreuil, Heather Miller, John Boggs, and Jan Hollenback in attendance for tour; joined later by James Roberts of the Sauk Suiattle tribe. In addition to the three spawning beds, there is a warehouse, house foundation, and small concrete slab with two depressions within the site fence, and a water diversion structure, pump, pumphouse, and corrugated metal cylindrical structure that houses a number of screw-top glass jars that appear to be for water sampling. In the water are pieces of wooden fencing or grating. These structures all appear to have been directly related to the spawning beaches, but it’s not clear how. They are absent from the inventory forms or the reports that we have. (Jan remembered that HRA was supposed to inventory these later—or that its absence had been a question at another time that she thought was to be resolved with survey. Lisa Mighetto seemed to think that they were not of historic age and that’s why they were not recorded? This is something we need to resolve.) HLM Note: After returning to the office, I searched for old records regarding the HRA site survey that was done at the spawning beaches. I found brief mentions to the water diversion equipment, but nothing definitive as to when it was put in (one account noted that the pond, pump, and so on were related to the 1966 incarnation of the spawning beaches, which might explain why it was not included in the original inventory?). This question needs to be resolved, as the structures are obviously there because of the fish. Questions that arose: Can we address adverse effects on the spawning beaches in the HPMP, which is only in draft form now? - Yes, but need to consider other pressing concerns, most notably fish habitat and safety concerns with the site, such as the concrete walls that are part of SB1 or whether visitors would be allowed within the fence or not. Are there historic photos of the spawning beaches and/or the water diversion structures? Can we figure out who lived in the little house? If so, can we interview them? Are there historic aerials or maps of the creek alignment prior to building of spawning beaches that we can get a hold of? (Elizabeth, can you follow up on this with the fish biologists who are trying to restore the creek alignment? Do they maybe have something?) What constitutes enough cumulative effects to adversely effect the district as a whole is an ongoing question we all have. What kinds of creative mitigation can we come up with? - Preserve in place has problems concerned with it here, most notably the safety issue. - Some ideas: o Bankhead in Banff National Park (Canada), which is an old coal mining site with structures being allowed to deteriorate but interpreted by signs on a loop trail that is part of the larger park system – Heather thinks this is a good example of a way to incorporate the spawning beaches into a USFS interpretive brochure. o Sites mentioned in a recent article about benign neglect being a new way to consider PinP, or rather decay-in-place, where interpretable portions of infrastructure are neither maintained nor destroyed, but allowed to decay naturally. More detailed interpretation could occur offsite.  Note: This strategy might fit well with USFS mandate for ―late- successional reserve‖ in this area. 3. Concrete Museum Newspaper Project  Discussion of CD project for Concrete Heritage Museum. This would involve digitization of older Concrete Herald newspapers onto CDs with a searchable index. Original estimates were around $8000. The discussion revolved around whether the HPMP had identified how the PME for Year 2 of the License would be spent. The HPMP suggests that an enhancement study (about $60,000) could be spent on a Concrete Heritage Museum project. Jan remembered that this was talked about as one way to spend PME money, but that the idea was to come up with PME studies yearly and that many different projects could be accomplished through this funding source. The Concrete Heritage Museum study was originally an idea to have oral histories that tied the Baker River community to the museum. Historical themes would be tied to the Baker River Project (like homesteading, railroad, cement quarrying, etc). We all agreed that oral histories that captured these themes would be important and could be part of the Enhancement study. We also thought the digitization of the Concrete Heritage could also be part of this Enhancement study. 4. Evaluate Meeting Great to see James and John Improvements: More attendees Next Meeting July 25, 2007 Baker Lake Lodge  