BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda October 3, 2007 11:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. Canjun Bar and Grill, Concrete, WA Lunch 12:30 Agenda 1. Welcome and Introductions-Elizabeth 2. Review Action Items-All 3. Discuss new date for November CRAG meeting 4. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee-Connie 5. Baker Master Plan Overview-Elizabeth 6. Update on WA Portland Cement Company HD Historic Structures Report- Heather 7. Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC-Elizabeth UB Hatchery-Elizabeth Adult Trap-Elizabeth LB Power House-Elizabeth 8. Monitoring Report Overview-Chris 9. Elk Land Purchase Proposal-Elizabeth 10. Evaluate Meeting-All 11. Define Next Steps-All   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 3, 2007 11:00 a.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m. Cajun Bar and Grill, Concrete, WA Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Connie Freeland (PSE), Jan Hollenbeck (U.S. Forest Service), Ron Kent (Army Corps), Heather Miller (HRA), Kelly Bush (ERCI), and Chris Miss (NWAA). PRESENT BY CONFERENCE CALL: Rob Whitlam (DAHP). October 3 Agenda: 1. Welcome and Introductions-Elizabeth 2. Review Action Items-All 3. Discuss new date for November CRAG meeting 4. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee-Connie 5. Baker Master Plan Overview-Elizabeth 6. Update on WA Portland Cement Company HD Historic Structures ReportHeather 7. Status report on early implementation of Settlement Agreement projects FSC-Elizabeth UB Hatchery-Elizabeth Adult Trap-Elizabeth LB Power House-Elizabeth 8. Monitoring Report Overview-Chris 9. Elk Land Purchase Proposal-Elizabeth 10. Evaluate Meeting-All 11. Define Next Steps-All   ACTION ITEMS Heather will check the HAER work on the Lower Baker gate cars and the Gulper, find out who it was sent to, and get it to Jan and others who need it. Elizabeth will check that everyone was sent the draft results of the archeological resource monitoring. Elizabeth will get design information on the Adult Trap for CRAG when it is available, and in time for input. Elizabeth will add Greg and Russell from SHPO to the list for CRAG meeting notices for discussions on historical aspects of projects. Elizabeth will talk to Roger at the USFS about a design plan for stabilization. Welcome and Introductions--Elizabeth Elizabeth introduced the new facilitator, Candace Wilson from PDSA Consulting. Review Action Items: None. Elizabeth gave a brief report of the June 20 field trip to the FSC and spawning beaches. More discussion will be needed on these areas. We are still working on archival research to discover more background story on the beaches. A foundation from a former residence has been found. Efforts are being made to determine the previous owner. Discuss new date for November CRAG meeting The next meeting will be Wednesday, November 7, at the Baker Lodge. The December meeting will be held Wednesday, December 5, location TBD. Update from Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee--Connie The last BRICC meeting was a conference call on August 22. We are still waiting for the license. Next meeting will be on October 24 at the Upper Baker for a tour of the FSC. The NMFS biological opinion is outstanding. It has been written and vetted internally, but has not yet gone to FERC. The Town of Concrete issued a shoreline permit which has been appealed by the cities of Burlington and Mt. Vernon and Diking Districts 1 and 12. The hearing will fall sometime November 5-9. These bodies also appealed the water quality cert and CZMA. We are unsure of the implications if PSE loses the appeal. Would it hold up the license? The Corps signed an agreement for the Skagit General Investigation. All except the appellants agree that flood control depends on what the Corps determine. Paul Wetherbee, Project Manager for Baker License Implementation, will provide a master schedule before the next meeting. It will require the date of license issuance to be finalized. They discussed the idea of a quorum. The meeting norms require that meetings involving decisions have o 1 representative from the Tribes o 1 representative from federal agencies o 1 representative from state agencies o 1 representative from PSE with a vote by proxy allowed. Each group is different; the quorum does not apply to CRAG. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 3, 2007 Page 2 of 5   New information from the USFS on the survey and managed species is available. Baker Master Plan Overview--Elizabeth Paul Wetherbee is working on early implementation and is overseeing budgeting, etc. He would like to come to the November 7 CRAG meeting to introduce himself as well as the Master Plan. PSE is trying to be view the Baker Project more holistically in order to create a Company vision for the project. The Master Plan would focus on goals, visions, facility needs, etc., and integrating those so there are better structure and protocols. It would include License and Settlement Agreement requirements, as well as Company goals and visions. The license is not specific about how we implement details of some things. Update on WA Portland Cement Company HD Historic Structures Report--Heather HRA was contacted to prepare the WA Portland Cement Company Historic Structures Report on specific items on PSE property, including concrete silos, warehouse, concrete storage barn, company housing, conveyor system, and a garage. The goal is to evaluate structures and provide options and costs for use/re-use, etc. Historical American Engineering Record - Henry Kunowski, historical architect, and Ann Gillespie, research historian, did field work last week. A structural engineer will come next. They are reviewing scanned corporate documents that go back to 1905, looking at the larger system, including Bear Creek, Rocky Creek Dam, the quarry, and the town. A photographer is coming this month; they are racing against the weather. The draft report is due December 16, and the final report is due January, 2008. Status Report on Early Implementation of Settlement Agreement Projects Floating Surface Collector--Elizabeth: The FSC is in the water now, and they are building the transition structure. On October 8, they will move the FSC to take the place of the "Gulper". The "Gulper" will be relocated and secured near the craneway (this is where the current FSC is located). They need to be moved at the same time. This will be documented by White Noise Production; hopefully there will be a helicopter flyover. They will secure the Gulper at the Craneway area till the final disposition of it is decided. The aluminum transition section may be re-used by Tacoma Power; otherwise, it will be scrapped. We are looking at other options for the rest of it. It may be a year before it is dismantled. ACTION: Heather will check the HAER work on the Lower Baker gate cars and the Gulper and who it was sent to, and get it to Jan and those who need it. UB Hatchery--Elizabeth Elizabeth is trying to get the CADD design put on a map. There was discussion of the process to determine project effects on historic properties. This is a topic for future CRAG discussion. ACTION: Elizabeth will check that everyone was sent the draft results of the archeological resource monitoring Adult Trap--Elizabeth Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 3, 2007 Page 3 of 5   We are expecting some design completion by the end of the year with a 2008 or 2009 start date. We will keep some, and replace some of it. The trap will be state-of-the-art for better retention of adult fish, better access, controls, fish movement, etc.  There will be Interpretation & Education opportunities. It is located near the present Visitor Center and there are discussions about conflict between facility needs and public access. We are looking for ways to re-use as much as possible. There was discussion about the CRAG's opportunity to give input to the design plan for this project and upcoming projects, and how to use the Historic Properties Management Plan as an alternative to Section 106. ACTION: Elizabeth will get design information on the Adult Trap for CRAG, when it is available, and in time for input. ACTION: Elizabeth will add Greg and Russell from SHPO to the list for CRAG meeting notices for discussions on historical aspects of projects. LB Power House This project is several years out. There are five spots being considered, and the Upper Skagit's have given initial input. Some issues are slide area disturbance, Hazmat, remediation. Some studies have been done, but feasibility studies are still needed. When the site is selected, we can do AP and archaeological reconnaissance. We are not sure of the plan for soils and for the old power house under the slide. CRAG will need to determine how we deal with these issues and what information we would need. Monitoring Report Overview--Chris Chris reviewed the Monitoring Report. One stabilization project is complete, and next priorities for stabilization were discussed. ACTION: Elizabeth will talk to Roger at the USFS about a design plan for stabilization. Elk Land Purchase Proposal--Elizabeth We are still reviewing whether license obligations can be fulfilled through the use of an easement for an elk habitat. Evaluate Meeting Good location Phone good. Facilitation good. Lots discussed. Good to discuss historic buildings and structures. Good to balance archaeological with architecture. Great to have monitoring report. Improvements: Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 3, 2007 Page 4 of 5   Tribes' participation Missed Bob M. Define Next Steps  Visit site needing stabilization. Those who are interested meet at 10 a.m. on November 7, before regular CRAG meeting.  Treatment things. HPMP Schedule o Half hour overview at November meeting o PowerPoint run-through at December meeting Next Meeting Wednesday, November 7, 2007 Baker Lodge Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 3, 2007 Page 5 of 5    2007crag20071003.pdf en 