 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group July 17, 2007 9:30 a.m. – 1:30 p.m. PSE Mt. Vernon Business Office 1700 East College Way Mt. Vernon, WA Lyn Wiltse-Facilitator 425-890-3613 (call for meeting information) AGENDA 9:30-10:00 Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda, Revised Norms 10:00-10:20 FERC/BRICC Status Update 10:20-11:00 Mini-workshop on RRG article implementation issues, if license has been issued 11:00-11:15 Break 11:15-12:00 Review revised Implementation Schedule, including comments by RRG on subtasks for for inclusion 12:00-12:30 Lunch 12:30-12:50 Discussion of “Model” plan for Article 303 12:50-1:00 Updates of Ongoing Project Activities/Activities in or Near the Project area. 1:00-1:15 Update on status of resource group quorum rule 1:15-1:25 Report on Baker Resort planning activities 1:25-1:30 Evaluate Meeting, Set meeting Agenda BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes July 17, 2007 9:30 am - 12:30 pm Forest Service Building, Mountlake Terrace FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE, (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if plans to attend the meeting change) Note: To verify whether a meeting will occur during inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstance, call Pam Garland the morning of the meeting at home: 360-826-3087 or cell: 360-661-2243. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Brian Adams, (Skagit County Parks and Recreation), Jim Eychaner, (RCO Recreation and Conservation Office), Andrea Fichter (Town of Concrete), Pam Garland (PSE), Cary Feldmann (PSE), Brock Applegate (WDFW), Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group Landscape Architects), Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council), Lyn Wiltse, (facilitator, PDSA Consulting), Candace Wilson (PDSA Consulting). NEXT (TENTATIVE) RRG MEETING DATES Oct. 16, 9 am – 2 pm, WDFW’s Mill Creek office Dec. 3, 9:30 am – 1:30 pm, WDFW’s Mill Creek office NEW ACTION ITEMS Cary: Report back to RRG from BRICC teamlet discussion on quorum rule Ann/Pam: FS/PSE to work on information gathering issues for Special Use Authorization for Baker Resort, with report back to RRG All: Provide input on how best to coordinate with interested/required parties on implementation activities for any specific articles All: Provide Pam input on additional sub-task items to include in implementation schedule, within 30 days of 7/17/07, if possible, for discussion at next meeting Brian: Give us an update on easement for Lake Shannon at our October meeting. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4 RRG Final Meeting Notes, July 17, 2007 Pam: In September set up teamlet to plan for workshop on Article implementation at October Meeting. Teamlet members include: Ann, Brock, and Jamie. Pam: Check with Cary re: video of FSC for October meeting (possible show during lunch time?). Brock: Check on timing of eagle nesting, and other terrestrial considerations. Jamie: Add consultation to the schedule. Pam: Send out updated mailing list to all. Pam: Send out driving directions to WDFW in Mill Creek and handouts with next meeting notification. QUORUM DISCUSSION When we get the license we need a quorum to conduct business. That means representatives from four groups (Federal, State, Tribes, and PSE), or a proxy. How this rule will be operationalized will be decided at the next BRICC meeting. Stay tuned. BRICC / LICENSING UPDATE USFW submitted their Biological Opinion (BiOp) a couple weeks ago; still awaiting the BiOp from NMFS. FERC will not issue the license until they receive that BiOp. We are now thinking it may be the end of October before they issue the new license. In the meantime, early implementation activities are continuing in order to be ready when the license is issued. (Ex: the terrestrial group is working on acquiring elk property). The Town of Concrete issued a substantial development permit. The Department of Ecology has issued the 401 and CZMA consistency plan. Concrete’s permitting process, as well as the 401, was appealed by Diking Districts 2 and 12, and the cities of Burlington and Mt. Vernon. The court date is set for November 7-9; these legal proceedings should not affect license issuance. The June Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee (BRICC) was cancelled. The next meeting is currently scheduled for August 22 in Mountlake Terrace. RRG MINI WORKSHOP The idea here would be to set up a consistent way for all the plans to come out. We also want to consult with other resource groups, especially the TRIG and the CRAG, for instance any ground disturbance will need to involve CRAG and will require a survey. (It’s not an opportunity for them to say no or re- negotiate the deal.) Ann reported that the Forest Service is looking at scheduling for the articles where they are providing funding. Brian reported we are currently potentially ahead of schedule in finding access (working on the easement issue) for Lake Shannon. The workshop will provide a forum to prioritize tasks and lay out the schedule and identify checkpoints. Ann suggested sharing using MS Project for managing the schedule and for communication with other team members. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, July 17, 2007 Page 2 of 4 We agreed that a teamlet would meet in September to set the schedule using the report as a model. On October 16 we would extend our meeting time to 9 a.m. – 2 p.m. and meet at WDFW’s Mill Creek office. An additional meeting was set for Monday, December 3, also at the WDFW’s Mill Creek office. It was suggested that the RRG might meet monthly after the license is issued. REVIEW IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE Pam reviewed with us the high level report she put together based on the format being used by other groups. She acknowledged that it makes sense to use MS Project to track the schedule in greater detail. Article 301 is going to be a summary of all the activities. She also gave an update on Resort Redevelopment progress and timelines. Ann explained that the plan for the resort is to create a FS level 3 campground. There would be no flush toilets. The existing cabins would be removed. Other buildings (e.g. generator building) would be used going forward. The Special Use Permit expires end of 2008. We want to have a plan for redevelopment coincide with this schedule with the aim of not losing a season of operation. Ann reported that the money is tight for this project. We’ll look at seeing if we can generate this report directly from MS Project. DISCUSSION OF “MODEL” PLAN FOR ARTICLE 303 We reviewed the draft of the Plan Model for Article 303 as a model for what the plans we submit to FERC might look like. Cary sees this as a plan within a plan. If FERC asks for more detail we would of course supply it. The idea is that what we submit to FERC would be a higher level framework and not restrict ourselves unnecessarily by calling out too much detail. There is also an effort for all resource working groups to have a common feel/framework as they will all fit into an annual report to FERC. It was agreed that Article 303 is basically an agreement between USFS and PSE. Their obligation is to be true to the Settlement Agreement. The RRG won’t really be approving/vetoing anything on the plan. It will serve more as a sounding board, or to offer suggestions. ONGOING PROJECT ACTIVITIES / ACTIVITIES IN/NEAR PROJECT AREA Jamie reviewed the tasks completed since our April meeting. He, Pam and Ann met at the Resort and engaged in technical discussions for how to get the redevelopment work done. After reviewing the existing maps of the site, it was determined that a ground survey would also be necessary. After outlining existing site observations, he also reviewed with us initial construction estimates. The site will require significant upgrades to meet the intent of the FS standards. We’ll be going from 89 spaces to 50. This would include removing tall non-native understory vegetation less desirable in appearance and replace them with native plantings. The circulation pattern is also a major issue. We discussed the need for an entrance station that includes restrooms. Tasks expected to be completed before our October meeting include: -- Re-defining the costs & budget -- Field design – which campsites stay -- Disability site access review -- Schematic Site plan with new ground survey. The aim is to be at 30% design by spring of 2008. The construction document and bid phase could be complete by October 2008. Construction could begin, weather permitting, in January of 2009. Nesting eagles might be a constraint. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, July 17, 2007 Page 3 of 4 Jamie reviewed a “ballpark” estimate of construction costs, including demolition. The estimate does not include hazmat abatement for removal of the generator building, a new administration building, or Swift Creek stream bank stabilization measures. Current estimate is $1,069,000; construction budget is $680,000. OTHER UPDATES Pam reported that recreation is up and revenues are down. The resort is busy. Lake Shannon has been busy as well. Over the Fourth, both rented porta-potties were destroyed. Fishing has been good. A lot of progress is being made on the FSC (Floating Surface Collector). Road 1106 (From Baker Lake Road to dam) is in need of a new permanent bridge. PSE is working with Whatcom County on this. Construction should be complete by year end. Ann reported the Shadow Sentinels Trail is the only one that has been cleared of fallen trees. HANDOUTS Agenda Notes from April 17, 2007 RRG Meeting Recreation Resource Group Meeting Norms, Revised as of April 17, 2007 Quorum Discussion for BRICC Plan Model for BRLP Article 303 Recreation Task Inventory Spreadsheet Van De Vanter Group July 17 Report Van De Vanter Group July 17 Draft Project Design Approach and Schedule Van De Vanter Group July 17 Draft Ballpark Construction Cost Estimate Maps (2) of Baker Resort site MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well: Great attendance! Good food! Got out early! Jamie’s presentation Jim’s presence…humor! What to Do Differently: Get handouts before next meeting – attach to meeting notification if possible. Mill Creek location? DRAFT AGENDA FOR NEXT RRG MEETING October 16, 2007. Tentative location: WDFW Mill Creek office 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Workshop to prepare for license implementation. Brief update on Resort status Set agenda for December 3 meeting Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, July 17, 2007 Page 4 of 4  