 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Osprey/Loon Teamlet Meeting January 25th, 2007 (12:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.) PSE Mount Vernon Business Office conference room 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, Conference ID: 213454 Conference Password: 12345 (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 or 206-276-1204(cell)) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA 1. Welcome, review agenda 2. Licensing/permitting update  BiOp, WQC, SEPA, related to Osprey or Loons?  HPA, other approvals? 3. Loon Platform Construction  Platform Design  Anchor Design  Use Restriction Zones – devices, signage, etc. 4. Loon Platform Location  Which reservoir or both?  Locations for each platform, and installation timing.  Do we need to coordinate with the Recreation Working Group? Others? 5. Osprey Platform Placement  Platform location 6. Other?  Site Visits, Monitoring programs? 7. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Loon / Osprey Teamlet Final Meeting Notes January 25, 2007 12:00 pm – 3:00 pm PSE - Mount Vernon, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Rich Riehl, and Jennifer Blackburn (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Don Gay (USFS); Bob Kuntz (NPS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator / note-taker (PDSA Consulting, Inc). AGENDA TOPICS Osprey platform location Loon platform construction Loop platform placement NEW ACTION ITEMS Bob – Send Tony the Loon Lake contact info Don – Dig up the research on Loon disturbance distance and send to Jennifer by Mon., Jan 29 Jennifer – Incorporate feedback from today, send two new sketches (platform alone and a ‘full- system’ view w/ floats and access restrictions) to Tony by Feb. 9 for distribution to the group All – review the new sketches and respond to Tony with any final feedback by Feb. 14 Osprey Platform Location Nine osprey platforms currently exist on Lake Shannon; we discussed the placement for a tenth platform. Tony projected a map onto the wall and we discussed the possible options. Based on historical and likely usage and the location of other platforms, we chose the spot across the lake from the boat ramp (same site that used to have a natural snag). Tony will coordinate. Loon Platform Design / Construction The settlement agreement calls for a total of three platforms. Jennifer walked us through a PowerPoint presentation of her research into the various aspects of potential platform designs, including: platform Baker River Project Relicense Page 1 of 2 Loon / Osprey Teamlet Meeting Notes, January 25, 2007 FERC Project NO. 2150 type, height above water level, surface material, ramp design, netting, anchor design, and access restriction. Anchor design and access restriction are the biggest issues. Anchoring is a challenge because we want to ensure the platforms aren’t sunk as the water level goes up and we want to avoid excessive movement. In terms of access restriction, Don will dig up the research he has about loons’ needs in terms of distance and forward that to Jennifer. Jennifer took notes of the team’s questions, concerns and input for the next phase of design. She will incorporate today’s feedback and send two new sketches (platform alone and a ‘full-system’ view w/ floats and access restrictions) to Tony by Feb. 9 for distribution to the group. The team will review the new sketches and respond to Tony with any final feedback by Feb. 14. Loon Platform Placement: Without the license, we don’t have NEPA coverage on Baker; we do have an HPA for Shannon. Due to that and our desire to test our design with one platform, we agreed to build and place one platform on Lake Shannon this year. Our preference is to place the platform south of Thunder Creek. As we looked at Baker for the two additional platforms we will install next year, we identified two sites: 1. East of Noisy Creek 2. near Sandy Creek HANDOUTS Agenda for this meeting Loon Platform PowerPoint Baker River Project Relicense Page 2 of 2 Loon / Osprey Teamlet Meeting Notes, January 25, 2007 FERC Project NO. 2150  