 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Elk Teamlet Meeting April 20th, 2007 (9:00 a.m. to Noon) PSE Mount Vernon Business Office conference room 1700 E. College Way Mount Vernon, WA 98273 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, Conference ID: 6906 Conference Password: 4578 (Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 or 206-276-1204(cell)) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. License updates (if any) 3. Land acquisition update  Status of progress w/ “initial parcel” owners  Next steps 4. Identification of alternative initial acquisition properties - ongoing  Identification of other ownerships, parcels for trade – Ray  WDFW parcel screening, TRIG selection process  Steps for approaching land owners, conducting pre-acquisition surveys 5. Land Acquisition Plan – ongoing  Status of North Cascades Elk Herd Plan  Status of TRMP 6. Other? 7. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Elk Teamlet Final Meeting Notes April 20, 2007 ~ 9:00 am - 12:00 pm PSE - Mount Vernon, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT: Tony Fuchs and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Bob Nelson and Ray Croswell (RMEF); Brock Applegate and Mike Davidson (WDFW); Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA Consulting, Inc). NEXT MEETING DATE ELK: Date and location TBD TRIG: May 3, 2007, Mtlk. Terrace, 9 – 3 TODAY’S AGENDA TOPICS Licensing Update Land Acquisition Update on “Initial Parcel” discussions Status of Other, Alternative Properties WDFW Parcel Screening Approaching Land-Owners Status of N. Cascades Elk Herd Plan Update TRMP Status NEW ACTION ITEMS Mike – Contact WDFW lands agent to review possibly tradable parcels OLD (Still Relevant) ACTION ITEMS Chris – Send Tony the email address for the GIS contact (re: old action item, below) Tony – Act as our liaison and send instructions to the team Tony – Continue to work with PSE‟s budget folks to develop simple budget spreadsheet All – Continue to think about other desirable parcels and bring ideas to future meetings Baker River Project Relicense Page 1 of 3 Elk Teamlet Meeting Notes, April 20, 2007 FERC Project NO. 2150 BRICC / LICENCE UPDATE PSE is working internally to be prepared for a June issuance. If we don‟t have a new license from FERC by the April 30th expiration of the previous one-year extension, PSE will file for another one-year extension so they can continue to operate under the provisions of the existing license. BiOps have been written and submitted to PSE and the Forest Service for review. Land Acquisition: Ray, Ira and Tony reviewed the status of the initial parcel, a parcel that has recently come to our attention, and the three alternate parcels the team reviewed last year. Mike shared his feedback / input on our priorities relative to these possible lands, and encouraged us to include him / WDFW in purchase plans and the drafting of any possible easements. Mike shared that WDFW has some significant land holdings and noted that they have some flexibility, which varies by parcel, for trading and leveraging others. Mike will make contact with WDFW‟s lands agent to review current holdings for possibilities that may tie into our goals. If we continue to move toward trade possibilities, it will be good for WDFW‟s lands folks to connect with PSE‟s lands folks to discuss issues and challenges related to those options. Elk Range Needs: We then discussed the seasonal range availability. Mike noted that summer elk range options are fairly large and improving. Winter ranges are the least abundant and therefore the WDFW‟s highest priority for the Nooksack Elk Herd. Spring/fall transition ranges are also limited and are also an appropriate priority. WDFW Priorities and the Herd Plan: The good news is that the herd is recovering (500 seen at last review). Unfortunately, much of the herd is in the periphery areas rather than core areas – and is infringing on areas that are not compatible to elk. Elk depredation, auto/elk collisions (particularly on Hwy 20), and other public safety issues have grown exponentially over even the last five years and are expected to continue to grow exponentially over the next ten or more years. Mike noted that the lower periphery areas are still considered elk range; the only things that have been eliminated are the priorities for enhancements within those zones. That philosophy may change with increased damage in those areas. The philosophy for managing elk isn‟t just based on where elk are now, but is based on encouraging the herd toward locations that are anticipated to have high tolerance of elk in the future (including future compatibility with hunting, public safety and damage minimization). Some mitigation options (fences, for example) are valid, but need careful consideration. Even though saving „at risk‟ land is a reasonable and laudable motive, WDFW noted that land acquisitions for active management must be consistent with the long-term management plans. If we choose to buy and manage land that the herd management plan and the WDFW doesn‟t endorse, we assume liability for loss of public safety and damage complaints. The elk management plan is being updated this year (draft to be available by August 31, 2007), so the timing is great for coordinating our efforts. Once drafted by WDFW, partners – including tribes, RMEF and folks like us (TRIG) – will have the opportunity to review and provide input to the plan before the fish and wildlife commission reviews and provides final approval. Once approved, the management plan is the statutory document that drives WDFW actions. Baker River Project Relicense Page 2 of 3 Elk Teamlet Meeting Notes, April 20, 2007 FERC Project NO. 2150 HANDOUTS Agenda for this meeting Feb. 20, 2007 Final Elk Teamlet Notes AGENDA FOR NEXT ELK TEAMLET MEETING Date: Date & location TBD, based on need 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 2. Review Costs Spreadsheet 3. TRMP Elk Chapter, including objective 4. Land Acquisition Update a. Status “initial parcel” b. Alternate sites c. Land Acquisition Team Update 5. Evaluate Meeting, Set Date and Agenda for next Meeting Baker River Project Relicense Page 3 of 3 Elk Teamlet Meeting Notes, April 20, 2007 FERC Project NO. 2150  