Baker River Project License Implementation Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee January 23, 2008 9:00 am – 3:00 pm WDFW 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, WA  Conference Call-in Information: MeetingPlace Main Number 425-456-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 123456 Password: 802906  AGENDA 9:00 – 9:45  Introductions Review Notes, Agenda Project Updates Action Items  9:45 – 10:30  Resource Group Decision Process Chart  10:30 – 11:00  2008 Capital and O& M Program  11:00 – Noon  License Schedule Update 12:00 – 1:00 Lunch  1:00 – 2:00  Updates From Resource Groups  2:00 – 3:00 Next Steps Next meeting Agenda Date: 2/27/08 Evaluate Meeting  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Agenda, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 2   Directions to WDFW, 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard, Mill Creek: From Interstate 5, take exit #183 From the south, turn right onto 164th Steet From the north, turn left onto 164th Street Go east on 164th St. about one mile (passing Martha Lake on the left) At the bottom of a long hill, turn left onto Mill Creek Boulevard and go about 1/2 mile The WDFW office is on the left (west) side of the street Parking is limited; if necessary, park across the street at the shopping center Check in at the front desk and let them know you are attending the BRICC meeting in the Large Conference Room; they will direct you Paper copies: Arn Thoreen, Bob Helton, Patrick Goldsworthy  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Agenda, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 2   Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker River Interim Coordinating Committee Final Conference Call Notes January 23, 2008 9:00 am - 1:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek FINAL MEETING NOTES PRESENT Ed Schild, Cary Feldmann, Paul Wetherbee and Kathleen Maddox (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Rich Johnson and Mark Hunter (WDFW); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Bob Helton (Citizen); Jon-Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones by phone (USFWS); Alice Kelly by phone (Dept. of Ecology); Dennis London by phone (Wildcat Steelhead Club); Lyn Wiltse and Jamie Riche, facilitation (PDSA Consulting, Inc). Kathleen’s Contact Information: 425.462.3831, Kathleen.Maddox@pse.com NEXT BRICC MEETING DATE: February 27, 2008 2008 Meetings: 9am–3pm, WDFW, 3/26, 4/30, 5/28, 6/25, 7/23, 8/27, 9/24, 10/22, 11/19, 12/17 TODAY’S AGENDA TOPICS Notes, Agenda, Action Items Resource Group Decision Process Chart 2008 Capital and O&M program Project, Resource Group Updates Next Steps, Next Meeting Agenda, Meeting Evaluation NEW ACTION ITEMS All: Review, confirm primary and back-up representatives on the BRICC contact sheet Lyn & Jamie: Draft and distribute suggestions for integrating proxy notification into team norms Paul: Bring a flow chart to our next BRICC meeting outlining the BRCC decision process Kathleen: Send out most recent norms and contact list Kathleen: Follow up to ensure better conference phone equipment is available for the BRICC and Resource Group meetings OLD, STILL RELEVANT, ACTION ITEMS Linda Email out ACE reservoir design requirements Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4   LICENSE UPDATE: The BRICC is still waiting for the BiOp from NMFS. Lyn shared an update from Steve Fransen; he is working hard on final edits even as we meet. When finished, legal review should require no more than 2 to 4 days. At this point PSE is doing all they can to be ready as soon as the license is issued. They are hoping to get it no later than May (after FERC‟s three-month review). DISCUSSION OF FLOOD STORAGE LANGUAGE PROPOSAL PSE entered into a settlement agreement with the City of Mount Vernon, the City of Burlington, and Dike Districts 1 and 12 to end legal challenges to the Baker Comprehensive Settlement Agreement. As part of that settlement, the Petitioners had the opportunity to ask the BRICC to consider their proposal to modify Article 107 to the BRICC. Three letters of response to the petitioners were distributed at the meeting; those letters were from Bob Helton and the Upper Skagit and Sauk-Seattle Tribal Communities. DOE also sent a letter saying it wanted to wait until the completion of the GI. WDFW felt similarly. USFWS sent a letter in support of not changing the Comprehensive Settlement Agreement. The Wildcat Steelhead Club sent a similar letter. As the deadline is now past and there was not unanimous support, the proposal is no longer on the table. DECISION PROCESS Paul distributed a copy of Article 601 along with a one-page flow chart outlining his understanding of how a decision would get elevated from a resource group to the BRCC. We discussed the meaning of “consensus” and how to operationalize the “no objection” definition in Article 601. We discussed how to document existence of a quorum on meeting sign-in sheets and a notification process for proxy representation. Lyn and Jamie will create a draft of how these things might be integrated into team norms. We also discussed having two weeks‟ notification of issues on agendas. Team norms do not supersede the process outlined in 601. Paul will bring a flow chart to our next meeting outlining the BRCC decision making process (pg. 138 of the article). Paul will also send the flowchart we reviewed today to the Resource Groups for review (how resource groups elevate issues to BRCC). PSE’s 2008 CAPITAL AND O&M PROGRAM Paul distributed a spreadsheet showing the implementation schedule for 2008 Baker projects: The Upper Baker FSC should be operational by the end of March; painting to be finished after the „fish rush.‟ The hatchery is in detailed engineering right now. It requires a special use permit from the USFS, who requires a license to issue the permit. Construction will commence after the license and permit are issued in time (hoping for 2008). The Lower Baker power house modification, which ties to Article 106, will proceed to detailed engineering in the second half of 2008. The Lower Baker FSC should be operational in 2012. Planning for this will continue through 2008. Schedule is being defined for the following projects: Acquisition of elk habitat will be emphasized in 2008. Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 4   Floating loon platforms Baker Lake Resort PSE expressed how the delay in license issuance makes it difficult for them to plan. The WTC requires them to demonstrate prudence in how they spend money; otherwise they may not be able to recover their costs through rates. The longer we go without a license, the more uncertain proceeding with pre- licence expenditures becomes. ARG UPDATE Cary shared that the FSC‟s screens are being balanced Feb 28 – March 28. The fish handling / sampling facilities will also be ready to go by the end of March. Then they will do the de-ballasting, which will lower the FSC in the water. We will then be ready to operate! There will be an opening ceremony of some kind; stay tuned for details! Development of the hatchery will be coming up to 60% design shortly. Ernie Brannon will be providing an independent review. Cary shared that the In-Stream Flow Report is complete. Next ARG meeting is February 12. The co-managers will be getting together soon to discuss lake planting. TRIG UPDATE Bob (RMEF) shared that negotiations are still underway with the landowners of the “original property.” In the meantime, the TRIG is actively looking at other parcels. Each property‟s vegetation is reviewed carefully for elk forage. The loons did not use the loon nesting platform that was launched last year, so TRIG agreed to modify the platform to make it more attractive to the birds and redeploy it this spring. The TRIG is also in the process of writing the Terrestrial Resource Management Plans, with a botanical teamlet focused on chapters within their area of expertise. The aim of these plans is to keep decisions local and then issue reports to FERC. Bob shared that this work is moving forward slowly but surely and the process is working well. Cary shared that there might be a graduate student working on carex flava. CRAG UPDATE Paul shared that the CRAG met in January and supports (through the Historical Properties Management Plan) the disposal of the old gulper, which is a contributing element of the historical district and is being replaced by the new FSC. The team has salvaged the louvers and documented the gulper‟s attributes. RRG UPDATE When the RRG met last, the focus was on process, using Article 303 as a plan model. The group is laying out a conceptual plan for how the resort will be redeveloped. There are BiOp issues relative to Marbled Murlett and Spotted Owls – may have to do surveys to address these issues. G.I. UPDATE The president‟s budget did include funding for the Corps to work on the GI (General Investigation). We will get an update from USACE at our next BRICC meeting. SKAGIT COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL MGMT DISTRICT Skagit County is assembling a flood control management district and has invited PSE to participate in a Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 4   technical review capacity. The Advisory Group is 15 members appointed by county commissioners, and there are three technical groups. We will get more information at our next meeting. PMF UPDATE PSE is completing their work on the Probable Maximum Flood – they will be getting input from FERC on the draft report and will be meeting with Skagit County next month. We‟ll get an update on the findings at our February BRICC meeting. MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well Phone participants – good input, thanks for calling in! Welcome Mark Hunter! Good organization Nice working group reports Facilitation adequate Congrats to new dad, Jon-Paul :) What to Do Differently Different caterer, include a fruit plate or other options for those with dietary restrictions Missing some folks Phone participants need access to information prior to meeting Improve phone equipment – satellite mics still not working well AGENDA TOPICS, NEXT MEETING Review / Discuss Decision Flow Charts License Update Project Updates Skagit Co. Flood Control Mgmt. District PMF Update USACE: GI Update and ACE Measures Evaluation Next Steps Future Meeting Topics: Presentation / Update on GI process Project scheduling relative to license issuance (what if we don‟t have a license by Q1, Q2, etc.)  Baker River Project Relicense BRICC Draft Notes, January 23, 2008  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 4 of 4    2008bricc20080123.pdf en 