BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group August 19, 2008 9:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Mill Creek WDFW Office 16018 Mill Creek Blvd Mill Creek, WA 98012-1541 (425) 775-1311, ext. 130  Lyn Wiltse-Facilitator 425-890-3613 (call for meeting information) AGENDA 9:00-9:30  1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda  9:30-9:50  2. FERC/BRICC Status Update- Cary  9:50  9:50-10:30  3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting-(None at this time) 1. Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) 2. Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent), etc  Please designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend! 4. Discuss follow-up with USFWS re: MarbledMurrelet and North Spotted Owl  Tree identification and vegetation management Meeting  Agreement or Memorandum with USFWS  Impacts of Must Do’s/Should Do’s on schedule and scope  10:30- 10:50 5. Break 10:50-11:30 6. Status Update on Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan (Pam, Ann)  Review Revised Site Plan  Discuss Phasing aspects  Discuss next steps-Schedule, funding, alternate schedule  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   11:30-12:00 12:00–12:30 12:30-12:45 12:45-1:00  7. Lunch Provided 8. Strategy for soliciting feedback from other Resource Groups (Cary, Pam) 9. Update-Other licensing projects (Cary) 10. Evaluate Meeting, set next agenda  * Time allows for other agenda topics if anything has been overlooked or newly arises.  To join the meeting by phone Meeting Place Main Number 425-456-2500 Internal Number 81-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484  Meeting ID: 7188 Password:  12345  Driving Instructions to WDFW Office in Mill Creek:   From I-5, take Exit 183 onto 164th St SE    Continue eastbound about 1.5 miles    At the bottom of the hill, turn left onto Mill Creek Boulevard    WDFW on left about 1 ½ blocks north directly across from Bank of America.    Parking is available.  Phone is 425-775-1311  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes August 19, 2008 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Office, 16018 Mill Creek Blvd., Mill Creek  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if plans to attend the meeting change) Note: To verify whether a meeting will occur during inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstance, call Pam Garland the morning of the meeting at home: 360-826-3087 or cell: 360-661-2243. PRESENT Ann Dunphy (USFS), Pam Garland and Cary Feldmann (PSE), Paula Mann (Town of Concrete), David Gerox (WDFW), Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting). NEXT RRG MEETING DATES Oct 21, Dec 16, 9 am – 2 pm, at WDFW’s Mill Creek Office NEW ACTION ITEMS  All: Bring your calendars to the Oct 21 meeting as we will be setting the schedule for future RRG meetings at that time.  Pam: Send out finalized decision making flowchart to support Article 601 to members along with these notes.  Pam: Touch base with tribes, County, and other stakeholders to encourage their participation in these meetings. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Ann: Talk with Greta about setting up follow-up meeting / site visit with USFWS.  Paul: Review idea of sharing 30% design plans with FERC.  Pam: Talk with Elizabeth re: maybe setting up a joint CRAG/RRG meeting to address I&E opportunities. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, August 19, 2008  Page 1 of 4     Brian: Is the easement for Lake Shannon considered a completed ROW? What is the exact location? Give us an update on easement for Lake Shannon. Check with Steven Falquest on this. The easement was done by resolution decree by the commissioners.  LICENSE UPDATE Cary reported that the BRICC met on July 23 via video-conference call with sites in Burlington, Bellevue, and Tacoma. With the exception of some audio problems at the Tacoma site, the system worked fairly well. This will be available to all resource groups in the future with the aim of minimizing travel time and the associated impact on the environment. Discussions included the license and the Biological Opinion that NMFS sent to FERC in early July. We hope to receive the license this fall. Once the license is issued, we will all have 30 days to review for appeal. PSE will notify all participants as soon as the license is issued. At the last BRICC meeting, Paul gave an update of the now finalized Article 601 Decision Making Flowchart. All final license-related documents are posted to the Baker License website. The next BRICC meeting is scheduled for September 24, 2008. BAKER LAKE RESORT DEVELOPMENT PLAN Ann reported on the field checking activities recently conducted at the resort. They have added in some previously missed trees – the total tree removal has increased from 21 to 76 trees. These trees are of various sizes. Removal decisions take habitat into consideration. They also tweaked some of the site designs to save as many trees as possible. They feel good about the circulation pattern. They are fine tuning the construction schedule. Next steps include drafting a proposed agreement for the USFWS who we anticipate would then perform a field review. We are aiming for a large construction window. Construction should fairly nearly match the current level of activity (July – September). Ann explained that the Forest Service will be doing some limited stand improvement cutting with an eye toward trees that may become a hazard in the future and also enhancing views. David cautioned us about the adverse impact of removing trees in wetland areas. He also explained that some Marbled Murrelet and Spotted Owls were found to be in the area during the last survey conducted in 1996. He would like to see a follow-up survey performed. The plan calls for rehabilitating areas where roads are being closed and also protecting / relocating native vegetation where possible. The plan also includes the installation of bear-proof trash containment. PSE is in the process of setting up an agreement with the Forest Service that would allow them to continue to operate the existing resort for one more year (Memorial Day through Labor Day weekends). Actually it will open for Memorial Day weekend and then close and re-open in mid-June. Construction is scheduled to begin in September of 2009. At that point demolition would begin. By the end of 2010 (in time for the 2011 summer season) construction should be complete. LOON PLATFORMS ON BAKER LAKE Don Gay (USFS rep on the TRIG) asked Ann to comment on the locations of the loon platforms. She believes they are pretty much safely out of the pathway of major boat traffic. Law enforcement believes Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, August 19, 2008  Page 2 of 4   they may be vulnerable to being shot at. At the last TRIG meeting they reviewed four additional platform designs. They also need to address debris getting caught up in the lines that protect the platform area. Ann will want to review what is decided on from safety and aesthetics perspectives. We also want to avoid popular fishing spots. We will stay tuned. Ann shared that the Forest Service is changing the way they look at recreation by taking a more businesslike approach about long-term use and sustainability of the different facilities. CROSS-RESOURCE ISSUES These issues will certainly come up as we move into license implementation (e.g., FSC and loon platforms). All participants in the process are encouraged to anticipate cross-resource impacts. Additionally, PSE Team Leaders of the various resource groups will be meeting regularly to raise such issues. Design and development plans will include formal requests for feedback from other resource groups in accordance with PSE’s Project Lifecycle protocol. Other feedback will be sought / given on a less formal / ongoing basis. There is concern that there is high potential for a misstep here. We may want a standing agenda item for the BRCC meetings to include contemplation of cross-resource issues (after the report from each resource working group). This is a process that we will continue to watch and improve over time. OTHER LICENSING PROJECT UPDATES ARG Upper Baker Floating Surface Collector (FSC) has just completed its first operating season. It was a very successful year. It is now out of the water and maintenance / improvements are being performed. Hatchery construction was deferred until next year due to the delay of license issuance. Design stands at 99.9%. Rare plant surveys are being conducted. The design for Lower Baker FSC is underway and is scheduled to be operational in 2012. There are cross-resource issues here. Lower Baker Powerhouse designs are underway. There may be some historical / cultural issues here. There are no rare plants to be protected. The Lower Baker adult fish trap will have some view issues to be considered, and construction will begin early in 2009. There will also be cultural and recreation issues here. Paula shared that the Town of Concrete is putting a lot of emphasis on Thompson Bridge as a tourist focal point (near the Visitor Center). PSE is in the process of developing signage, etc. for the Lower Baker Visitor Center, etc. Cary previewed for us a video on the operation of the FSC that will be shown at the Visitor Center. Similar videos are planned for the adult trap, powerhouse and hatchery. The next ARG meeting will be September 9, 2008. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, August 19, 2008  Page 3 of 4   TRIG The elk land purchase is underway. TRIG members approved that good faith intent was met by PSE for pre-acquisition activities. Funds not spent will roll over to post-license acquisition funds. PSE has also been released from meeting forage equivalency requirements. An offer may be made on a piece of property within the watershed northwest of Concrete. There may be some recreational issues here (hunting, gathering, wildlife viewing area, etc.). The land acquisition teamlet is in the process of developing a standardized protocol to guide future land acquisitions. Plans are being developed using a consistent model developed here by the RRG. This will facilitate FERC’s review of the plans and allow us appropriate local control within the context presented in our plans for FERC approval. We will know FERC’s reaction to this template within the next year. Pam has contracted with EDAW to help with the drafting of the plans. She will share the scope and cost estimate EDAW develops at our next meeting. CRAG The CRAG is working on their Historic Properties Management Plan and has done surveys to support prelicense activities in other groups. They meet again on August 20. RRG MEETING SCHEDULE At our October 21 meeting (our next meeting) we hope to have received the license. We will further define the frequency of these meetings at that time. MEETING HANDOUTS  August 19, 2008 Meeting Agenda  June 17, 2008 Meeting Minutes  Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Update MEETING EVALUATION What Went Well:  Great food  Got out early  Great participation by members present  Good relationship building What to Do Differently:  Would like to increase attendance by stakeholders  Look at doing a video conference for future meetings  Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, August 19, 2008  Page 4 of 4    2008rrg20080819.pdf en 