 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Land Acquisition Process Teamlet Final Meeting Notes May 9, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 11:00 am USFWS Office - Lacy, WA FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT: Tony Fuchs, Anna Kopitov, Haley Edwards and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Bob Nelson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); and Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS) NEXT MEETING DATE June 13th, at USFWS office in Lacy TODAY’S AGENDA TOPICS  Overall needs for Land Acquisition Process (LAP)  Review of draft process prepared by PSE  Next steps and action items NEW ACTION ITEMS  Haley – PSE to reorganize Action List for next teamlet meeting  Haley/Anna/Jacob/Tony – Prepare “straw man” specific criteria for Elk, Wetlands, Forest, and Aquatic Riparian for review at next teamlet meeting  Tony – Prepare table of funding and when it is available  Ira/Haley – Show more clearly on flow chart where Real Estate comes into play  Anna – Work with Dave, others, to gather GIS info to support criteria analysis OLD (Still Relevant) ACTION ITEMS  none OVERALL NEEDS FOR LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS (LAP) We started out discussing the needs of the different settlement articles, specifically 502 (Forest), 503 (Elk), 504 (Wetland), and 505 (Aquatic Riparian). Our process up to now has been focused solely on the initial elk acquisition property and then on alternative properties for the initial acquisition. The LAP we are developing now would include process for serving all four of the above articles. Baker River Project Relicense Page 1 of 2 LAP Teamlet Meeting Notes, May 9, 2008 FERC Project NO. 2150 Lou Ellyn raised the question of how can some of the funding for the different articles be accelerated if we find a priority property before the money is available. We discussed the NPV (net present value) of the money in the settlement and suggested that perhaps if the NPV was not changed that some of the expenditures might be accelerated (this would need to be raised to a BRICC discussion). NPV and how it works can be a presentation at an upcoming TRIG or teamlet meeting. A combined list of the funding and funding timing would be helpful to the group, so PSE will prepare a table and bring to the next teamlet meeting. REVIEW OF DRAFT PROCESS PREPARED BY PSE PSE has met several time internally to discuss the LAP and has prepared a draft process flow chart and an Action List (which is a brainstorm of acquisition needs, not necessarily in order of priority). The group reviewed the flow chart and provided some edits. Bob suggested we add another sub process for acting on a valuable, available property quickly without going through all the steps. Overall the group liked the process chart. We started going over the Action List and had discussions about criteria and it’s development and use. PSE will develop “straw man” draft specific criteria for each of the four habitat types and bring it to the next teamlet meeting. Haley handed out an example of what one of these might look like for wetland habitat. PSE will also update and prioritize the items within the Action List for next meeting. Anna handed out a potential process for developing a Land Acquisition Habitat Model (LAHM). This model would use GIS to identify and rank high value habitats and opportunities for acquisition for the various land acquisition articles. Anna will work with Dave, Lou Ellyn and others to collect data sets and provide them to Joetta to develop our database, which will then be used for the modeling exercises. NEXT STEPS PSE will update the process documents for review at the next teamlet meeting. We will continue at this time to pursue our existing process for the initial acquisition of elk property. HANDOUTS  Acquisition Process Flow Chart (draft)  Acquisition Action List (draft)  Draft Wetland criteria  Land Acquisition Habitat Model (LAHM) list (draft) AGENDA FOR NEXT LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS TEAMLET MEETING Date: June 13, at the USFWS office in Lacy, 9am until 11am. 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 2. Review Updated Process Flow Chart and Action List 3. Update on LAHM data base development 4. Next Steps 5. Evaluate Meeting, Set Date and Agenda for next Meeting Baker River Project Relicense Page 2 of 2 LAP Teamlet Meeting Notes, May 9, 2008 FERC Project NO. 2150  