 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Tuesday September 16, 2008 (9:00 am to 2:00 pm) Puget Sound Energy Skagit Serice Center/Burlington Office 1660 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 3698741, Password: 12345 (Please tell Anna (425-462-3773 or 206-437-9228(cell) if you plan to call into meeting) AGENDA 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda (15 minutes) 2. License updates (15 minutes) 3. Land Acquisition update (15 minutes) 4. Updates to Forest Service Special Status Plants list (30 minutes) 5. Review specific comments on August 3, 2008 drafts of Special Status Plant Plan and Special Status Plant Habitat Management Procedures and Guidelines (FERC and TRIG plans) (~1 hour) 6. Review Draft Carex flava Management Plan and Draft Carex flava Management Procedures and Guidelines (~1 hour) 7. Discuss native plant propagation (30 minutes) 8. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting. (15 minutes) Copy and paste this link into your web browser for a map/directions to Skagit Service Center/Burlington: http://www.mapquest.com/mq/2-itHdNI0nDlZ88cvr BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Tuesday September 16, 2008 (9:00 am to 2:00 pm) Puget Sound Energy Skagit Service Center/Burlington Office 1660 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 3698741, Password: 12345 (Please tell Anna (425-462-3773 or 206-437-9228(cell) if you plan to call into meeting) DRAFT MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Anna Kopitov (PSE), 425-462-3773, anna.kopitov@pse.com Present at Meeting: Laura Potash Martin (USDA-FS), Dave Geroux (WDFW), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Anna Kopitov (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental Associates) 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. License updates 3. Land Acquisition update 4. Updates to Forest Service Special Status Plants list 5. Review specific comments on August 3, 2008 drafts of Special Status Plant Plan and Special Status Plant Habitat Management Procedures and Guidelines (FERC and TRIG plans) 6. Review Draft Carex flava Management Plan and Draft Carex flava Management Procedures and Guidelines 7. Discuss native plant propagation 8. Evaluate meeting and set date and agenda for next meeting. New Action Items:  Laura will investigate the possibility of providing access to, or a copy of, the Forest Service (FS) plant species database for the Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest (MBS).  Kathy will check the FS Special Status Species list for all of Washington State against the Baker Project species list. 1 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Kathy will send Anna and Tony the most recent versions of the draft Project Initiation form and Pre-field Review form for non-National Forest System (NFS) lands.  Kathy will send Dave Geroux a copy of the Carex flava Plan with today’s edits shown in track changes.  Anna will incorporate the Carex Working Group report into the document, as well as field procedures and other sections, to the Carex flava draft ‘Procedures’ document and then will circulate the draft prior to the next botanical teamlet meeting.  Anna will schedule a botanical teamlet meeting for Wednesday, October 22nd, 2008 and notify members. Anna will select a location.  Laura will provide Kathy a list of graminoids for the 2009 collection contract. Kathy will work with Joetta to search the Baker database for locations of these species (UTMs preferred; TRS otherwise). Report on old Action Items: Laura provided an update on the status of Survey and Manage species and provided current FS guidance (3-31-08 email from Carol S. Hughes). In summary, a lawsuit is pending regarding the 2007 ROD to remove Survey and Manage. The current direction to continue to document occurrences of species listed on the 2003 Annual Species Review (ASR); these species are now referred to as ‘Other Rare and Uncommon Species’. As far as the R6 list of Special Status Species is concerned, all species on the Washington list should be searched for and documented, not just those documented or suspected on the MBS. Hypogymnia duplicata and Platanthera orbiculata are included on the 2003 ASR, but are not listed on the 2008 Special Status Species list. Please see Carex flava discussion below for details about this species. Laura updated us on the status of herbicide approval for use. The MBS had been allowing the use only of glyphosate. It has not been effective on hawkweeds. Recently, Clopyralid was approved for use; this chemical is effective on hawkweed. Also, Imazapyr was recently approved for use; in combination with Glyphosate it is effective on knotweeds. The MBS still has a limited array of herbicides available for use, relative to R6. The forest hopes to broaden their approved list of herbicides in the next few years. Laura noted that if new herbicides are desired for use on any Baker project sites (such as reed canarygrass trials), a site-specific NEPA would need to be conducted. Laura noted that it will be preferable to retain the ISMS location ID numbers for special status plant occurrences for the time being, rather than transitioning to the newer NRIS system. Joetta posted the T2/T5 database to the ftp sites; Kathy provided Laura a disk copy of the excel version. Anna and Dave reported on recent site visit to the Carex flava site. Large amounts of woody debris have accumulated at/on the site. Plants were small and few had inflorescences; one population along transect 2 had inflorescences; several flags were refound but plants were not; reed canarygrass seems to have expanded its area of cover. Tony added that in July the pool was at full level, and snow pack had 2 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 persisted into June. Factors such as inundation, large woody debris, a late growing season and limited light availability may have contributed to the lack of seed production at the time of the visit. Ongoing Action Items:  Anna will contact Tim Miller of WSU to discuss reed canarygrass management methods.  Anna will continue to investigate opportunities for low elevation orthophotography of the Carex flava site at Baker Lake.  Laura will send Anna and Kathy FS table of Standard Mitigation Measures for the MBS. Meeting Discussion: License update: Anna reported that PSE expects the license to be issued in October. Tony clarified the steps following license issuance. PSE will have 30 days to review the license and determine whether they will accept or request a stay of individual articles or the overall license. Settlement agreement signatories, agencies and tribes also may have 30 days to review the license and may submit an appeal to FERC. Land Acquisition update: PSE is actively working on one property that is under consideration as potential elk habitat. PSE’s offer has gone through internal legal review and has been presented to the landowner. Contact with the landowner of a second property will be initiated in the near future; Ray Croswell of the Rocky Mt. Elk Foundation will make the initial contact. Review of Special Status Plant Plan (FERC plan): Edits to the document were made in track changes during the meeting. Review of Special Status Plant Procedures (TRIG plan): Edits to the document were made in track changes during the meeting. Review of Carex flava Plan (FERC plan): Edits to the document were made in track changes during the meeting. Laura provided a summary of USDA-FS direction regarding treatment of Carex flava, which is not currently included on the R6 Sensitive Species list (2008). Carex flava was recently removed from sensitive status by the USDA-FS (2008). However, the closest known population to the Baker Lake site is in Colville, Stevens County; therefore, this site represents a significant range extension. For this reason, under the new NFMA regulations (USDA 36.CFR.219.10(B- 2)), Carex flava may be designated as a Species-of-Concern or a Species-of-Interest when the MBS revises their Forest Plan. The species continues to be listed by WA State as S3, rare or uncommon. Review of Carex flava Procedures (TRIG plan): Edits to the ‘status’ section of the document were made in track changes during the meeting. Anna will continue to add details of identification and enumeration methods and other study procedures to this document and will distribute the document prior to the next botanical teamlet meeting. We also discussed the need to conduct a baseline population assessment after license issuance. 3 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  