BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda April 16, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA Lunch 12:30 p.m.  Agenda 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for March 19, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Decisions Required at Today’s meeting Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent), etc Please designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend! 3. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects FSC UB Hatchery Adult Trap LB Power House Channel Creek Spawning Beaches 4. Lunch 5. Review CRAG 2008 Work Plan 6. Review Treatment Plan—“Confidential Technical Working Group” Overview of fieldtrip 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA  Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. Present: Larry Campbell (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community), Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Ron Kent (Corps of Engineers) Scott Schuyler (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Heather Miller (Historical Research Associates, Inc.), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). 2008 Meeting Dates: (3rd Wednesday of each Month): May 21, June 18, Jul. 16, Aug. 20, Sept. 17, Oct. 15, Nov. 19 (change to 12th?), Dec. 17 (change to 10th?)  March 19 Agenda: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for March 19, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates?  Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent)  Please designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend! 3. Status report on Settlement Agreement Projects  FSC  UB Hatchery  Adult Trap  LB Power House  Channel Creek Spawning Beaches 4. Lunch 5. Review CRAG 2008 Work Plan 6. Review Treatment Plan draft Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 1 of 6    Overview of field trip 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps New Action Items:  All: Send in all Treatment Plan comments by the end of April. After checking with her PSE managers, Elizabeth will email the final draft to the core group of CRAG members at the end of April with notice that the decision on the Treatment Plan will be at the May 21 CRAG meeting. All: Members will send their comments on the Treatment Plan to all members in open email during the 2 weeks review period in early May. Elizabeth will send Larry a copy of the 11/1961 Journal of Power Division Warner Wayne Article Candace: Send notes to Elizabeth to distribute to CRAG members. Report on Action Items: Elizabeth reported that about 30% of CRAG members gave a week’s notice whether or not they could attend the CRAG meeting. Meeting notices will come out as Outlook calendar events. Members are asked to respond Yes, No or tentative when they receive the meeting notice. Elizabeth orders lunch within a week of the meeting. Elizabeth will re-send a copy of the FERC letter as CRAG members do not seem to have received the copies sent out in February. Elizabeth has contacted the Town of Concrete about a representative to CRAG and is awaiting a response. Elizabeth reported that there is ongoing discussion at BRICC and at PSE concerning the possibility and methodology of sharing Baker Implementation meeting notes with resource group members. The update on the mitigation plan (MOA?) is in the works. It is about 85-90% complete, waiting on more budget information. We are still missing comments on the Treatment Plan from Jan and from Sauk Suiattle. Elizabeth has attempted to get input from Sauk Suiattle. Outstanding Action Items: All: Give Elizabeth one week’s notice about your ability to attend each upcoming CRAG meeting. Use “tentative” response if you are not sure. Elizabeth: Set up a meeting with Chris and Jessie to review and update the HPMP by the June CRAG meeting. Kelly: Send Elizabeth some scenarios to use as examples in portraying decision and quorum rules for CRAG over the life of the license. Jan: Send comments on Treatment Plan to Chris. Jan: Figure out arrangement for FS gate key for the rest of the year - ASAP Longer Term Action Items: Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project. Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 2 of 6   Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule. (She handed this over to HRA). Elizabeth will see if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan. 1.  Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items: Notes The March 19 meeting notes were reviewed with no changes. Agenda The agenda was reviewed and the order of topics was adjusted to move the Treatment Plan discussion to the last spot.  2.  Review Recent BRICC Activities / License Update License Update The BRICC met in March. The Bi-Op is still under NMFS review and has not yet been issued to FERC. We hope the license will be issued in summer of 2008, and projects are moving forward as if it will. Decision Making Process Elizabeth has asked her PSE managers to take the issue of inconsistencies in the definition of CRAG membership between the Settlement Agreement (S.A.) and the HPMP to the BRICC for discussion and resolution. The Corps of Engineers and SHPO are not signatories of the S.A., but they are members according to the HPMP. Ron clarified that the Corps signed the S.A. as a concurring member, as is their custom. Scott indicated this issue is coming up in other groups as well. Elizabeth noted that clarity is still needed on what constitutes a decision. Further discussion in CRAG about decision-making scenarios and quorum are pending discussion of these issues at a higher level. Decisions to be made in the meeting will be listed in the agenda as indicated. Unspecific placeholders will indicate there are no decisions to be made. If a voting member cannot attend a meeting in which a decision is to be made, they may email their proxy vote to Elizabeth. Decisions should be very clear or more discussion will be needed. There was discussion about the use of technical groups to make recommendations. The review process includes the opportunity for members to process recommendation through their organizations’ experts. Technical consultants are not voting members and provide expertise. Technical groups provide options and/or recommendations based on the best options to stabilize or preserve the site. Costs are considered at a later time.  3.  Status of Settlement Agreement Projects Floating Surface Collector The contractor is handing the FSC over to PSE, and the fisheries part is working.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 3 of 6   UB Hatchery This project has been moved to 2009 except the replacement of a portion of water supply pipe within 100 feet, which could happen in 2008 if the license is approved. Elizabeth is waiting for more information about this to make a report to CRAG. It is anticipated that there will be no effect. Adult Trap The plan for the Adult Trap was presented to the Recreation group on April 15, and comments are being received. There will be a presentation to the Town of Concrete. Then feedback will be incorporated, and we will have an opportunity to review the new plan. Henry Kunowski continues to represent CRAG interests. This project is scheduled to start summer of 2008 pending the license and 404 permit. Elizabeth and Chris will discuss this project. LB Powerhouse This project is scheduled for 2010-2011. The site has noit been determined, but it seems most feasible near the current location. CRAG will need to discuss some issues. This is not a historic building, but disturbance might be an issue. Elizabeth will bring information to CRAG as it is forthcoming. The old powerhouse is an archaeological site. Elizabeth briefly reviewed the history of the powerhouse and road construction in 1924, which significantly disturbed the area. The new powerhouse was built in 1961. Larry raised a question about the possibility of doing core studies of the area between deconstruction and construction. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches There is ongoing discussion between the Forest Service and PSE about decommissioning. Heather has done HAER work but there has been no access to the area on account of snow. Lots of photos were taken at the summer 2007 field trip. She is reconstructing old surveys. There is a question about why the old waterworks were not included in the HRA report on Historic Buildings and Structures which was sent to FERC in 2004. The creek has been modified. It would be interesting to look at the change in flow. This project is not on the CRAG agenda for 2008. 4.  We had our usual Working Lunch at the beginning of the meeting.  5.  Review 2008 CRAG Work Plan Elizabeth presented a draft of potential CRAG work for 2008 which she prepared after review of the HPMP and from the CRAG’s March 19 brainstorm.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 4 of 6   HPMP Review A teamlet of Chris, Jessie, and Elizabeth will review the HPMP and provide a draft to CRAG with the aim of finalizing the HPMP by the end of the year, ahead of the deadline to complete it within one year of license issuance. Treatment Plan The draft is almost complete except for comments from Jan and Sauk Suiattle. Except for surface collection, the process is likely to be done in the fall since weather has restricted access. There are questions about timing and the review process. If the Treatment Plan is adopted at the May meeting, surface collection could be done this spring. The May meeting will be confidential. Mitigation Plan of the Baker River Hydroelectric Development Historic District (BRHDHD) A teamlet of Heather and Elizabeth are working on this. A draft has gone to the PSE managers for review, and is now being tweaked before it is reviewed again by PSE managers. It will be brought to CRAG in the early summer. Monitoring Monitoring will be covered under the Treatment Plan as it is not outlined in detail in the HPMP. Scott indicated that Upper Skagit has a key interest in ongoing inventory of unknown sites that don’t get identified and captured. The HPMP includes revisiting known sites and after an event, but not a full annual survey. Larry raised a concern that PSE staff are trained to recognize artifacts. Training is in the budget, and there is also a Cultural Resource Enhancement Fund (CREF) for shoreline erosion. Elizabeth thought training is more likely for 2009 after the license is issued and to lighten the 2008 workload for CRAG. The training program needs to be developed. Elizabeth has already done training of operators, team members, and PSE managers. She has prepared Do’s & Don’ts cards, and language about inadvertent finds is being written into all scopes and contracts. The work plan can be revisited when the license is issued. Stabilization is part of the Treatment Plan. Review PSE Projects  Adult Fish Trap – There will be issues for CRAG to review prior to the August 2008 construction start date.  Hatchery – There will be review prior to a 2009 construction start date. Teamlets  Training Development – Scott suggested including Forest Service and Law Enforcement. The Upper Skagit has trained technicians. Other trainings might be a resource, such as the Puget Sound Community College online training.  Archeological  Historical  Ad hoc committee – this was added for things that come up Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 5 of 6   6.  Review Treatment Plan The draft Treatment Plan was reviewed and members had an opportunity to discuss and ask questions.  7.  Evaluate Meeting Well Done Great space Lovely people Nice to meet Larry Do Differently Terrible lunch  8.  Define Next Steps A confidential meeting will be held on May 21 to review and adopt the Treatment Plan.  Next Meeting  Wednesday, May 21, 2008 - Confidential Location: Multi-Purpose Conference Room at PSE Burlington Office  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting April 16, 2008 Page 6 of 6    2008crag20080416.pdf en 