 BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting June 5th, 2008 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 ©) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from May 1st, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting: YES 1. Decision Item #1: Should PSE proceed (based on price limits, schedule, and terms of negotiation set by TRIG) to negotiate and make an offer to acquire property X as previously identified by the TRIG to satisfy part or all of the land acquisition outlined in Phase 1 Initial Acquisition for Article 503 (Elk Habitat)?  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you can not attend. 4. General Updates  Loon platforms and surveys - Anna 5. Elk Update  Easements/Acquisition update - Ira  Alternate properties list/data base / status – Ira, Ray, Tony  Pre-acquisition survey reports – Anna/Kathy 6. Land Acquisition  Land Acquisition Process development– report out from teamlet - Tony 7. TRMP Update  New Format of plans - Marty  Next steps? 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (July 3rd, 2008) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes June 5, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Paul Wetherbee, and Haley Edwards (PSE); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Brock Applegate by phone (WDFW); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Don Gay (USFS); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Bill Hebner & Larry Bauman (WDFW); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA Consulting). NEXT MEETINGS: August 7, 2008 (Continue to hold July 3, 2008 open “just in case”) Future TRIG Meetings: First Thursdays through 2008. ACTION ITEMS  Haley - Send out Land Acquisition Process spreadsheet and flow chart  All - Review Land Acq Process information; send feedback to Haley by June 20  Tony - Send Site Selection Process document to Lou Ellyn  Tony - Distribute the Land Acq. Process teamlet notes along with these TRIG notes  Marty - Explore forage enhancement options and costs for Property X  Tony - Work with Cary to develop language that keeps property management revenue and associated costs within the budget that pays for a particular property PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS  Dave - Check to see if the high-damage area map is available to share electronically  Dave - Let Ira know if the Elk Core area follows any legal boundaries (rivers, etc.)  Ira/Cary - Meet with Tribes to more clearly understand their interests relative to easements.  Paul - Connect with Greta re: USFS / PSE financial process upon license issuance  Tony/Paul – Draft a proposal for TRMP language re: financial processes (budget, audit, etc). UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Paul shared that the PSE website is in the process of being updated. If it is not yet fully current, it will be in the next few days. The decision flow chart (article 601) will be reviewed and completed at the BRICC meeting next Tuesday. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 1 of 5 BRICC / LICENSE UPDATES Cary shared that the BRICC will meet next Tuesday afternoon in coordination with the ARG meeting (a.m.) and FSC tour (mid-day) at Baker. FERC is still waiting for the NMFS Bi-Op, which we’ve heard has made it through NMFS legal review and has been given to Steve’s boss. Paul shared that FERC called for a new or amended license before going forward with construction on the adult fish trap, so that project has been moved back a year to 2009. This will be discussed in more detail at the BRICC meeting June 10. Cary shared information about the FSC deployment and operations. It has been a successful season so far. The Sockeye run is not as record breaking as the ARG anticipated, but it is still the second highest run on record. The Coho run has been later this year and is ongoing at this time. Nearly 80% of fed fry have been captured, which is remarkable (previous high = 60%). Operations folks are very pleased with the FSC. LOON UPDATE Haley shared information about surveys Anna conducted; two loons were spotted 200 feet away from the platform. One of the float ropes has been snagged and pulled under the water’s surface, allowing logs and debris to become trapped in the exclusionary area. The platform and ropes/buoys will be removed after the season to allow the debris to move along (last year, only the platform was removed). Next steps include: platform design review, site evaluation, and selection before next year’s loon season. It was suggested that we reinstate the loon teamlet and set aside a portion of the August TRIG meeting for a loon teamlet meeting. BOTANICAL TEAMLET Kathy shared that the next botanical teamlet meeting is scheduled for June 26 and the group will discuss plant propagation procedures / issues, and will soon have two plans (Carex flava and plants of special status) in the new format for TRIG review. LAND ACQUISITION PROCESS TEAMLET Tony, Anna, Dave, Lou Ellyn, Bob, Chris, Ira, Haley, Cary are members of this teamlet, and they met May 9 in Lacey. See the meeting notes, which will be distributed with today’s TRIG notes. Tony walked us through a draft spreadsheet and flow chart. Haley will email both out to the full group to review, provide feedback (by June 20), and discuss at the next TRIG meeting. We noted that this work does not need to be complete for us to move forward on our initial elk acquisition. Team members made the following suggestions: include a reference to the decision process (the article 601 flowchart); note special considerations relative to article 505; and give the ARG a head’s up / update on the land acquisition process teamlet’s work. WDFW PRESENTATION RE: ELK DAMAGE & LAND ACQUISITION: Bill Hebner and Larry Bauman (WDFW) started the presentation by discussing the Elk Management plan. He noted that rebuilding the herd has been a ten-year process. Elk damage has been a divisive issue among locals; addressing those concerns within the Elk Management Plan has been critical to building support for rebuilding the herd. WDFW began tracking elk damage complaints in 2002; the number of incidents has increased each year as the herd has increased Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 2 of 5 and this year is on par to break previous records. When the damage involves a commercial agricultural or horticultural crop, WDFW is required to provide monetary compensation. The group discussed the herd's historical and current locations, the annual harassment window, damage hunts, and the herd's resistance to traditional hazing activities (cracker shells, fuse rope, repellents) ... since so many of the animals have never been hunted, they are not afraid of gun noises, etc. The WDFW presentation discussed how elk damage was managed in the past when the elk herd was considerably higher. WDFW historically managed elk damage in the valley by issuing a large number of cow tags. When all hunting was closed as the population declined, WDFW stopped issuing the cow tags. As a result, the resident population in the valley has grown considerably and elk damage complaints have increased as well. We also discussed allowed hunting, which presents challenges due to the landscape and local residential development. Road kills have averaged 6 - 15 per year, nearly all in direct vicinity of elk damage complaint areas. There has been at least one human fatality as well. The group saw photos of elk damage and the WDFW’s responses, and read a neighborhood petition that was presented to WDFW last winter (protesting elk damage and other concerns). We discussed the transplanted St. Helens elk, which appear to have remained in the core area. None of these elk has been associated with damage claims at this point. The group discussed specific properties, including one in particular that Larry volunteered to start the conversation with the owner if the TRIG is interested and asks him to do so. Stan referenced some of the issues discussed at the April 15 Tribe / WDFW meeting. He noted the need for ongoing discussions – both within the TRIG and separately between the Tribes and WDFW – about herd management and land acquisition. Tony noted our shared goals and asked for WDFW’s continued help with property identification. ELK LAND ACQUISITION: DECISION: Should PSE proceed (based on price limits, schedule, and terms of negotiation set by TRIG) to negotiate and make an offer to acquire property X as previously identified by the TRIG to satisfy part or all of the land acquisition outlined in Phase 1 Initial Acquisition for Article 503 (Elk Habitat)? Tony led a review and discussion about the property in question. Marty shared information about the vegetation, timber, wildlife, and expected elk forage value. The site currently provides about 400 of our elk forage equivalency units; Marty estimates that, with modest effort, this could be increased to 700 units, and could potentially be increased to 1,000 or more units, depending on management activities. Kathy shared information about last month’s site visit to evaluate the potential weed management needs / costs associated with the property; she noted that the site is pretty clean from a weed management perspective (estimated cost for knotweed control is under $10k). The TRIG continued to express interest in the property and its management for elk if it can be acquired and managed at a reasonable cost. We discussed PSE’s obligations under the Settlement Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 3 of 5 Agreement and the requirement to show a good faith effort to acquire the ‘initial parcel’ or its equivalent. In its current state, this site by itself does not equal the ‘initial parcel’ in terms of elk forage. Cary identified three possibilities: 1. The TRIG could declare that the initial acquisition’s good faith effort has been fulfilled, which would allow the initial acquisition money to roll into and be combined with the secondary acquisition money, which could then be used to purchase this site; 2. This site could be purchased and enhanced using the initial acquisition money to achieve the forage equivalency standard identified for the initial acquisition; or 3. This site could be purchased along with one or more additional parcels using the initial acquisition money to achieve the forage equivalency standard. Marty will evaluate management options and estimated costs associated with bringing this site’s elk forage equivalence units up to 1,437 (the “initial parcel’s” estimated units). Several members noted that we don’t have all the information we need today, and the seller has not expressed a sense of urgency. After quite a bit of discussion, the TRIG decided to postpone today’s decision until an appraisal and timber cruise can be completed. HANDOUTS  Agenda and May 2008 meeting notes  Land Acquisition Process Teamlet notes and draft flow chart  “Property X” weed management site visit report PARKING LOT  Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING August 7, 2008, 9 am – 2 pm, Mill Creek (Continue to hold July 3 open “just in case”) 1. Welcome, review agenda, notes, and action items 2. BRICC / license updates 3. Decision: property X a. Review appraisal, timber cruise, and management estimates b. Provide PSE with direction re: possible negotiations 4. Elk land acquisition update a. Easement update - Ira b. Alternate properties list / status - Ray, Tony 5. Property acquisition process a. Report out from teamlet b. Review spreadsheet and flow chart 6. TRMP – Review new format 7. Botanical Teamlet update 8. Loon Teamlet meeting (last hour) a. Review platform design b. Evaluate current site c. Select sites for add’l platforms 9. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 4 of 5 MEETING EVALUATION:  Good presentations – WDFW’s and Don’s  Great participation and collegiality among TRIG members  Distribute handouts in advance whenever possible Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 Final Meeting Notes, 1/21/2010 Page 5 of 5  