BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda February 20, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA Lunch 12:30 p.m.  Agenda 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for January 16, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Resource Group decision-making process overview 3. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects FSC UB Hatchery Adult Trap LB Power House Channel Creek Spawning Beaches 4. Lunch 5. LB Adult Trap Presentation PSE proposed plan 6. Review Treatment Plan draft 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps-All   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting February 20, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA  Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Cary Feldman (Puget Sound Energy)Toni Imad (Puget Sound Energy),Paul Weatherbee (Puget Sound Energy), Ron Kent, (Corps of Engineers), Kelly Bush (Equinox), Heather Miller (HRA), Henry Kunowski (HRA), Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Frank Postlewaite (R2 Consultants), and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting).  February 20 Agenda: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for January 16, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Resource Group decision-making process overview 3. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects FSC UB Hatchery Adult Trap LB Power House Channel Creek Spawning Beaches 4. Lunch 5. LB Adult Trap Presentation PSE proposed plan 6. Review Treatment Plan draft 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps - All ACTION ITEMS   Elizabeth will send the electronic draft of the treatment plan and initiate an email discussion and review process. Members will turn comments in to Chris within about 3 weeks. Chris will prepare a budget to support the treatment plan. Jan will do ARPA and determine the degree of NEPA required. Outstanding Action Items: Elizabeth will write a letter to notify FERC of the measures taken, through consultation with the CRAG, to address direct effects to the Upper Baker Barge. This letter will also propose that any cumulative effects of this action on the Historic District be addressed through ongoing consultation with the SHPO and the CRAG through the process outlined in the HPMP. Elizabeth will contact Gene Galloway in Feb-March to get information about drawdown. Elizabeth will start a conversation with PSE and FERC regarding site stabilization during drawdown. Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project. Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule. Elizabeth will see if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan. 1.  Review notes/agenda/action items: Agenda The agenda was adjusted to accommodate guests’ schedules, and items were addressed in the order of these notes. Action Items Nothing requires special attention at this time.  2.  LB Adult Trap Presentation – PSE Proposed Plan Frank Postlewaite, from R2 Resource Consultants, gave a slide show and virtual overview of the proposed plan for the Lower Baker Adult Trap, outlining changes to the existing trap. The building will be made of corrugated steel with concrete. The old trap will be completely removed except for the base area, and the trap will be raised above the 100 year flood line. Part of the existing parking lot is being enclosed to house I&E displays. Henry Kunowski of HRA, was introduced. He was appointed at the last meeting to provide oversight of the project on behalf of CRAG interests and to figure out I&E opportunities. With the goal of salvaging as much of the existing trap as possible, he has identified eight interpretative panels with potential uses on the site. He presented a conceptual plan for I&E and suggested adding fenestration (windows, vents, and grills) and staining the exterior, from both an aesthetic and a maintenance perspective.. The Recreation Resource Group has the Article responsibility for aesthetics. The review process involves getting comments from all Resource groups. Details of changes in the trap were reviewed. The main impact to character defining features is to the hoist structure, which will be replaced. Henry will be looking for other items to salvage and use.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 2 of 5   3.  4.  There is the potential for having multi-media, e.g. a web cam. Other I&E possibilities were discussed. The license is anticipated to come in April-May. Construction could start this summer. A mitigation plan for the historic district may be more effective than a MOA for each resource. There were questions and comments about the silo roof, walkway support, bracing, underwater viewing possibility, and school group access. There was agreement in requesting modifications to the roof and to bracing of the viewing area walkway. Next steps will be to form a group to work on aesthetics or find another way to resolve cross-resource issues. Henry can take CRAG comments to the RRG meeting. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? Paul Weatherbee, License Implementation Manager, reported that on the appeal made by the Diking Districts about the water quality certificate, which allowed the appellants to address the parties to the Settlement Agreement (S.A.) directly. At the January BRICC meeting, the matter was finally settled. The period for finalization had expired, with no change to the S.A. Resource Group decision-making process overview The new license is expected April –Maym and Article 601 decision-making process will need to be implemented in all resource groups. Paul reviewed a graphic representation of Article 601. Concerns were raised about issues with the PA, the HPMP, Section 106, and confidentiality. Additional concerns related to SHPO consultation, and full tribal involvement. There is the expectation that these processes can be concurrent; Article 601 has been agreed to by all S.A. parties. Any inconsistencies need to be worked out now in anticipation of the license. Article 601 provides for a record of decisions through a notification and consultation process. Consultation will take place prior to formal decisions, so that all parties (including those not in the S.A.) have a voice. Questions remain about process and what constitutes a decision. Group norms may be established to fit needs of the group (e.g.m a longer notification period). The Annual Report will outline decisions. FERC prefers to approve the process and let decisions be made locally. The S.A. cannot supersede law or FERC action. BRICC has the authority to adjust resource group quorums if absolutely necessary. Status report on Settlement Agreement projects Paul reviewed the Baker License Implementation 2008 Gate Schedule, which outlines project delivery. Some projects are not connected with the license and can proceed, but the timing of other projects depends on when the license is received. FSC The FSC is obligated to be ready by April for the spring season. The punch list will be completed in August. LB FSC  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 3 of 5   The Lower Baker FSC is due by 2012. UB Hatchery This project is connected with the license. An MOA or special use permit is needed from the Forest Service. LB Adult Trap In design phase (as reported above). LB Power House Modifications The work for 2008 is to identify alternatives and the best solution to meet the requirements of Article 106. Channel Creek Spawning Beaches This project is awaiting Forest Service input. 5.  Review Treatment Plan draft Chris reviewed options for treatment for identified locations. There are questions about whether ARPA, NEPA, or adverse effects are involved. It is possible to phase the project, or do collection only in 2008. One location is ideal for a field school activity. Elizabeth will investigate the possibility of a CRAG field trip in September or October to investigate the locations. ACTION: Elizabeth will send the electronic draft of the treatment plan and initiate an email discussion and review process. Members will turn comments in to Chris within about 3 weeks. ACTION: Chris will prepare a budget to support the treatment plan. ACTION: Jan will do ARPA and determine the degree of NEPA required.  6.  Evaluate Meeting Adult Trap presentation good.  7.  Define Next Steps Next steps are included in appropriate sections as reported above.  Next Meeting  Wednesday, March 19, 2008 Location TBA  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting January 16, 2008 Page 4 of 5    2008crag20080220.pdf en 