BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting Meeting Agenda October 15, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA Lunch 12:00 p.m.  Agenda 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for August 20, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Lunch 4. HPMP review 5. Discuss September Field Trip 6. Reschedule November and possibly December meeting times 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA  Meeting Notes Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE): email is elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com and phone number is (425) 462-3609. Present: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (US Forest Service), Ron Kent (Corps of Engineers), and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). Attending by phone: Chris Miss (Northwest Archaeological Associates), Rob Whitlam (Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation). 2008 Meeting Dates: Dec. 17  October 15 Agenda: 1. Review notes/agenda/action items for August 20, 2008 meeting 2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Lunch 5. HPMP review 6. Reschedule November and possibly December meeting times 7. Evaluate Meeting 8. Define Next Steps New Action Items:       Chris will assign budget figures to Treatment Plan items, as well as other potential work. Elizabeth will secure approval of her managers to bring a mitigation proposal to CRAG at the December meeting. Lauren McCroskey from the Corps and Russell Holter from SHPO will be invited to call in to participate in the discussion. If possible Elizabeth will send something out ahead of the meeting. Elizabeth will email CRAG members about the December meeting date, the agenda, and to ask if people can meet at PSE in Bellevue.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 Page 1 of 5   Outstanding Action Items:  All: Send comments on the HPMP to Elizabeth. Members are asked to add their comments to the end of the revisions table provided in August 2008 and to send copies to CRAG members and to NWAA who is revising the HPMP.  Elizabeth: Send color chips, roofing brochure, siding brochure, and design renderings in three color schemes for the LB Adult Trap along with a letter of information and instruction to all CRAG members for review.  All: Send comments on color choices for LB Adult Trap to Elizabeth within two weeks or as requested.  All: Give Elizabeth one week’s notice about your ability to attend each upcoming CRAG meeting. Use “tentative” response if you are not sure.  ON HOLD - Kelly: Send Elizabeth some scenarios to use as examples in portraying decision and quorum rules for CRAG over the life of the license. Longer Term Action Items:  Elizabeth will draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE’s process to consider with every project.  Elizabeth will collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a DOE schedule. (She handed this over to HRA).  Elizabeth will see if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan.  Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. 1.  Review Notes/Agenda/Action Items: Notes  The August 20, 2008 meeting notes were reviewed with no changes. Agenda  The agenda was reviewed and accepted. Report on Action Items:  Frank Postlewaite: Send design information to Elizabeth for distribution to CRAG members. Elizabeth received this information in the last few weeks.   Elizabeth: Send color chips, roofing brochure, siding brochure, and design renderings in three color schemes for the LB Adult Trap along with a letter of information and instruction to all CRAG members for review. This will be sent out after the license has been received, so HPMP language can be used.    All: Send comments on color choices for LB Adult Trap to Elizabeth within two weeks or as requested. Pending.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 Page 2 of 5     Elizabeth: Email CRAG members about the timeline and process for submitting their comments on the HPMP, and the follow up revision process. This is still in process.    All: Send comments on the HPMP to Elizabeth. Members are asked to add their comments to the end of the table. Comments are still being received. The timeline for finalizing the HPMP will be rescheduled if the License is received in the next month. All the agencies (includes PSE) and tribes will need to complete a 30-day review of the license and its conditions. This is to insure the License addresses any of their comments. In addition, signatories to the Settlement Agreement sure insure consistency with the License conditions. This will take precedence over review of the HPMP during those 30 days. Once that is accomplished folks can plan on resuming review of HPMP.    Elizabeth: Coordinate details of the September 17 field trip and get information out to CRAG members Completed.  2.  Review Recent BRICC Activities / License Update BRICC has not met. License Update Everything has been submitted to FERC, and FERC has indicated they are ready to issue the license. PSE expects to receive the license by November 1. When the license is received, the Programmatic Agreement stipulates interim guidelines between issuance and HPMP finalization. These interim guidelines give all the consulting parties (CRAG) and SHPO the ability to develop strategies to address affects to historic properties. Any disputes get forwarded to FERC to implement Section 106 (see PA for specifics). After the license is received, a Treatment Plan must be completed and one is mostly done. The HPMP must submitted to FERC for final approval within one year of License issuance. Maintenance Plans are already in place.  3.  We had our usual working lunch.  4.  HPMP Review The timelines for finalizing the HPMP may be pushed out due to receiving the license. Agencies will need to perform a 30 day review of the license. CRAG members need to send in their comments on the HPMP using the revision table as a record of recommended changes and changes that have been completed. It is likely this will be finalized toward the end of January 2009. There was discussion of the budget and potential projects for 2009 and 2010. Projects from other departments will be coordinated with all resources to include CRAG. If a field school is implemented, budget can be extended to cover. The budget is not limited to archeological projects. Elizabeth briefly explained the 7 gate process that is being used to manage the Baker Project.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 Page 3 of 5   ACTION: Chris will prepare a budget for the Treatment Plan items, as well as other potential work, for the December meeting. ACTION: Elizabeth will work with HRA to prepare a budget for the built resources work to be completed for the December meeting. 5.  Discuss September Field Trip Elizabeth, Ron, and Scott attended the September field trip to visit potential treatment sites (252, 253). They found potential features north of the original 252 site boundary. Elizabeth contacted NWAA to do some further field work. Following the September field trip, Elizabeth, Chris and four additional NWAA staff took another trip to visit the homestead sites #252 and #253. Chris reported on the subsequent visit. Neither site is a good candidate for stabilization. Mitigation Discussion There was some discussion of the concept of a more holistic plan for indirect mitigation of the historic built sites, which Elizabeth and HRA has been working on. Elizabeth gave some background for the development of the plan. She reviewed potential mitigation for individual resources which might include HABS/HAER, salvage, and Historic Architect input. Preserving in place is not a viable option, per the Settlement Agreement and the feasibility of keeping large structures no longer used in place. There has not been a suggestion for how to mitigate directly for the LB Barge, for instance. Her plan would involve using the Baker Club House as an interpretive and educational center, which could connect to a trail system and provide space for salvage items. It is possible the license may require extending public outreach, and the current location for the visitor center is not ideal. Unfortunately, the HPMP budget would not cover all this work, so if there was interest in mitigating effects to contributing resources within both Historic Districts, PSE would need to approve the plan. Ron would like to discuss this with their historical architect. Jan raised the concern that if this plan were implemented, would it be a trade-off for all the resources? The mitigation would be for known affects to the historic districts and as agreed to by all. Any development projects not approved by FERC could not be included. Any mitigation plan needs to go through the consultation process with all parties. ACTION: Elizabeth will secure approval of her managers to bring a mitigation plan to CRAG at the December meeting. Lauren McCroskey from the Corps and Russell Holter from SHPO will be invited to participate in the discussion. If possible Elizabeth will send something out ahead of the meeting.  6.  Reschedule November and possibly December meeting times The November meeting will be cancelled The December meeting will be held on December 17. Elizabeth will find another location as the Skagit room will not be available.  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 Page 4 of 5   Action: Elizabeth will email CRAG members about the December meeting date, the agenda, and to ask if people can meet at PSE in Bellevue. 7.  Evaluate Meeting Well Done  Good food.  Good to get together. Do Differently  More participation  8.  Define Next Steps  Treatment Plan Budget  Mitigation Plan  Review of License by Parties  Set 2009 meeting dates  Next Meeting  Wednesday, December 17, 2008 Location: TBA  Baker River Project - FERC Project No. 2150 Interim Cultural Resources Advisory Group Meeting October 15, 2008 Page 5 of 5    2008crag20081015.pdf en 