BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Aquatic Resources Group February 12, 2008 (9:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 6058, Password: 12345 Please tell Arnie (425-462-3442 (w) or 206-276-0316 (c)) if you plan to call into meeting  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from December 11th, 2007 meeting  9:00 - 9:30  2. Review recent BRICC meeting activities, licensing updates? 1. Resource Group Decision Making Process (PSE-Wetherbee)  9:30 – 10:00  3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting (Detailed information Attached (if needed)) 1. Decision Item #1 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) 2. Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent), etc. Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you can not attend! 4. Recap of 2008 Capital Programs (PSE-Wetherbee) Break at 10:15 5. Brief Updates Fish Facilities Operations Topics Downstream Fish Passage Facilities (PSE-Bruland) o Operations planning Sockeye Spawning Beach and AI Operations (WDFW) Fish Rearing Inventories & Releases (PSE-Bruland) Adult Trap Protocol Update or Changes  10:00 – 10:15  6. Hatchery 60% Design Comments to 30% and presentation of 60% (PSE –Jenness) o Review 60% design, open to comments Lunch Provided at 12:00 7. FPTWG Update Biological Evaluation Downstream Passage  11:00 – 2:00  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 1  10:25 – 11:00  2:00 - 2:30   Adult Trap Design Connectivity 8. Other Implementation Update – Schedule for developing Aquatic articles management 2:30 - 2:45 plans (PSE-Venard) 9. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (March 13th, 2008)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150  Page 2  2:45 – 3:00   Baker River Project License Implementation Aquatics Resource Group Meeting FINAL MEETING NOTES February 12, 2008 ~ 9:00 am - 3:00 pm WDFW Office, Mill Creek, WA  Team Leader: Arnie Aspelund, PSE, (arnie.aspelund@pse.com) PRESENT Arnie Aspelund, Jacob Venard, Cary Feldmann, Doug Bruland, Ginette Lacasse, Haley Edwards, Dave Jenness (PSE); Mort McMillen (McMillen Engineering); Ted Thygesen, Jed Varney, Rich Johnson, Brett Barkdull, Kevin Kurras (WDFW); Bob Helton (Citizen); Steve Fransen (NMFS); Jon-Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit Tribe); Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries); Phil Hilgert (R2); Craig Olson (NW Indian Fisheries); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Stan Zyskowski (NPS); Lyn Wiltse and Becky Molander (PDSA Consulting, Inc) NEXT ARG MEETING: The next planned meeting is on March 13, 2008. Future meetings will be held on subsequent second Tuesdays of each month, with exceptions noted (March & November): Mar. 13 (Th), Apr. 8, May 13, June 10, July 8, Aug. 12, Sept. 9, Oct. 14, Nov. 13 (Th), Dec. 9 NEW ACTION ITEMS: Jed: Follow up with Scott Lentz re. Beach 3 release sites. Rich: By June get with Co-Managers re. release sites beyond Beach 3. All: Get feedback on 60% hatchery design to Arnie by Wednesday, February 20. Mort: By early March send 3-D view of hatchery to Arnie to distribute to all. Nick: Set up FSC site visits to observe screens balancing. Jacob: Ask Nick to send update on success of screen balancing before next meeting. ACTION ITEM REPORTS Little Park Creek Trap PSE will continue trapping (collecting, marking, and sending fish on) at Little Park Creek Trap for another year. In August 2008 we will be reviewing data gathered with co-managers to determine whether it is a value-add going forward. We need a decision on how to proceed by 4/2009. Fry Release Allocation The co-managers announced their decision to release 100% of the sockeye fry from the Artificial Incubation program into Baker Lake this year. Hatchery surplus No action necessary on the disposition of hatchery steelhead surpluses as there were no steelhead Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 6   hatchery surplus this year. BRICC MEETING ACTIVITIES, LICENSING UPDATES NMFS Bi-Op Steve reported that the Bi-Op is now in the Portland office and is simultaneously undergoing legal review at the NOAA offices in Seattle (SandPoint). He hopes it will be to FERC by early March. He spoke recently with Steve Hocking who says he’s ready to go. We will continue to get an update on this at future meetings. BRICC Update This was the only Baker relicense group to meet in January. At that meeting the BRICC reviewed the responses by BRICC members to the presentation by Skagit County staff at the January BRICC meeting. Several members wrote letters to the settlement parties (Diking Districts and municipalities) saying not to deviate from what was specified in the settlement agreement. The result is that nothing changes from what we agreed to. They also reviewed Article 601 and ran through several scenarios and how decisions would be made. The default process is for decisions to be made by consensus at the technical level (the resource groups). Paul walked us through a proposed flow chart to operationalize Article 601. We also discussed how we will log decisions within the resource groups once we receive the license. The intention of the decision making protocol is to provide a record of what decisions were made and under what rationale. It is also designed to institutionalize the decision making process to support the length of the term of the license. We want to develop a similar/consistent process to address crossresource issues. If the resource group is unable to achieve a quorum then decisions could be elevated to the BRCC (at the discretion of the proponent). Any decisions to be made would be highlighted in the meeting and will be captured in a similar fashion in the meeting notes. We will provide a highlighted section (like below) to record the results of the decisions that were required on the agenda: RESOURCE GROUP DECISION PROCESS Quorum Met? (YES / NO) Decisions Required at Today’s meeting 1. Decision Item #1 Discussion (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent) Results (Consensus, Dropped, Appealed to BRCC) 2. Decision Item #2 (Title of Issue, Name of Proponent), etc. Results (Consensus, Dropped, Appealed to BRCC)  RECAP OF 2008 CAPITAL PROGRAMS Paul explained that the expanded capital program PSE is currently executing is new for them. To provide Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 6   structure for this they have come up with a Project Management structure with various gates (phases) that involve handoffs/closeouts/QA from one milestone to the next. A Project Manager will be assigned to each project in some cases each phase. Paul walked us through a Gate chart showing the schedule for each of the key Capital Projects: - UB Floating Surface Collector - UB Hatchery - LB Adult Fish Trap - LB Powerhouse Modifications) - LB FSC - Elk Habitat - Loon Floating Nest Platforms - Baker Lake Resort Re-development Capital - Water Quality Instrumentation PSE has mapped out key capital projects for 2008. There is also considerable planning to do to support implementation of the various resource groups. Many of the groups are currently working hard to develop these plans. We will modify the gates as necessary to implement the various plans, as the process PSE has defined is suited specifically to conventional capital projects. The various work plans will take into consideration the need to address the cross-resource issue. FISH FACILITIES OPERATIONS UPDATES Downstream Fish Passage Operations Planning Doug reported they are preparing with PSE biological staff and equipment for the juvenile fish trap sampling & hauling effort. They are busy doing reparation of guide nets for installation at Lower Baker in early March with the aim of being operational by April 1, 2008. These will be in place until we reconfigure Lower Baker. For Upper Baker, hoppers and transport tanks are being constructed in Portland. A trailer is being built (similar to existing) for the transport tanks – for juveniles. The trapping mechanism is a squashed ball that fits snugly in place. Next steps: Bio-techs will test screens, crowder, and sampling facilities. Note: No bull frogs – no ball o’ frogs were observed (for explanation see previous meeting notes). Fish Rearing Inventories & Releases Doug walked us through the Baker Project Fish Inventory Sheet. They are anxious to get pre-smolts out of raceways in preparation for all the next coho and sockeye fry coming out of incubators the end of February. From the circulars, freeze branded fish (2 groups of 5,000 coho and one group of 5,000 sockeye) will be released into Baker Lake mid-April. 5,000 freeze branded coho will also be released to Lake Shannon by mid-April. FSC Biological Evaluation Study (Pit-tagged fish) – 7,500 combined sockeye and coho ad-clipped are to be released during smolt migration season for the FSC mark-recapture performance study. We will release Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 6   500 at a time into reservoir over the course of 7 weeks. Last year we did gill ATPase sampling. We won’t be doing this in 2008 – will use the same procedure as last year (holding in tanks for a day and recovering at traps next day). We will perform tests at 500 cfs flow and at 1000 cfs flow. Some fish will be held for acoustic tagging. Equipment is already in place for this. We’ll get an update on how the study is proceeding at our March meeting. Doug also reported that we need to get the net pens into the forebay, which is frozen but is beginning to thaw. He also announced that PSE wouldn’t be hosting Trout Fest this year as it would interfere with hatchery construction. All trout will be put in Depression Lake before the opening day of fishing and through end of June/early July. 175K coho fry will be coming out of incubators – expect 3 to 5% loss from total egg estimate. Sockeye Spawning Beach and Artificial Incubation Operations Kevin walked us through the Baker Sockeye Data Sheet and the Incubation Worksheet. He expects 953,000 fish out of the artificial incubators this year. Loss was less than 4%. We also reviewed final numbers for adult recoveries at Sockeye Facility and the Sockeye Mortality Report and Carcass Disposal locations. Kevin reported we are two weeks out on first take of sockeye to incubation. In routine adult brood sampling, some IHN virus was detected. Jed assured all that this is a routine occurrence. Last year was rare as no IHN was found. A question was raised about protocol in low abundance years, and how discussion up front at the ARG would be helpful. WDFW took into consideration doing everything they could to maximize the numbers. Sockeye fry releases from Spawning Beach 4 are expected to start in two weeks. Access to release sites is limited with the snowfall. Jed will be talking with Scott Lentz, re: fry release sites for Beach 3, road access repairs are planned as soon as snow removal allows, PSE has stockpiled materials for the repairs. Rich Johnson will get with the co-managers by June to discuss other release sites. Adult Trap Protocol Update or Changes No changes were discussed today. HATCHERY UPDATE: 60% DESIGN Dave Jenness announced that PSE has integrated 50 pages of comments received at 30% design into the 60% design. They are well into the permitting process and are also working on sediment control plans. Outside expert Ernie Brannon will be most useful in reviewing operations, including the O&M manuals that are being developed throughout the design phase. Mort McMillen explained there were 140 drawings in this 60% review design. He walked us through the key changes since the 30% design and major issues that have been identified. Feedback was noted today (below) and PSE requested additional comments to be sent (to Arnie) by February 20th, so that they can be Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 4 of 6   incorporated into a design meeting agenda on Feb. 25th.  Questions/Issues/Feedback Provide spots in SB4 ponds to allow for easier capture/removal of non-producing fish. Additional evaluation on ensuring stormwater doesn’t get into the ponds. Motion sensor lighting in the hatchery building? Windows to provide natural light in the hatchery building? Concern expressed to consider aesthetics of the building. Have vertical lift at the spawning area stop at grade also. Provide screen slots for adult pond (functions that facilitate fry rearing) FPTWG UPDATE The bulk of this discussion was deferred until the March 13th meeting. The latest email Arnie saw from Nick is that he will coordinate site visits for observing the screens balancing work later in February/early March and that there are no regular FPTWG meetings planned until after this work. Floating Surface Collector (FSC) Arnie showed us recent photos of the FSC. He reported they have completed the ballasting and will be working on balancing the screens starting in the next few days. When the ice melts, the FSC will be put in its final position. The schedule calls for it to be operational by mid-March; normal operations call for it to be operational by April 1. Nick will coordinate site visits for those interested. Adult Trap Design Arnie showed several comparative illustrations (now and after construction) from various perspectives and an isometric pan of the designed trap structures. We are planning to have a more in-depth update of the design for the March ARG meeting. OTHER IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE – SCHEDULE FOR DEVELOPING AQUATIC ARTICLES MANAGEMENT PLANS Implementation Activities Jacob Venard reported that we are going ahead with developing implementation plans for Articles 108 (Gravel), 109 (Large Woody Debris ), 110 (Shoreline Erosion) and 505 (Aquatic Riparian Habitat). Drafts of these plans should be out for ARG review in time for our July meeting. Jacob also reported we will be evaluating a parcel of land for possible acquisition with elk and fish habitat, wetland and riparian values. There are adjoining properties that might also be available. We are looking into opportunities to partner with others and/or receive matching funding from the SRF Board, etc. HANDOUTS Agenda, Notes, 2008 Meeting Schedule ARG Representative List Article 601 - Settlement Agreement, Baker River Hydroelectric Project Article 601 Resource Group Decision Process Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 5 of 6   PSE Project Lifecycle – Baker License Implementation 2008 Gate Schedule / 2008 Baker Capital Projects Sockeye Data Sheet Baker Project Fish Inventory (February 7, 2008) Baker Adult Fish Trap Protocol (November 19, 2007) Baker River Adult Fish Return (Season June 2007-May 2008) – Season Totals Baker Fish Hatchery Renovation Contract #1004.05 – 60% Draft Submitted Feb. 1, 2008 (McMillen Engineering) PSE Baker Fish Hatchery Renovation 60% Design Review Well Done 60% Hatchery Design Walk-through Jed’s hatchery attitude (survival to adulthood) Soup! Bi-Op is off Steve’s desk! WDFW venue Good turnout Habitat is being looked at for acquisition Steve’s analogy Kevin’s data/annual report Got out early Do Differently Next Time Fish passage report Frog discussion Need larger trash receptacles Evaluation took too long AGENDA FOR NEXT ARG MEETING March 13, 2008 – 9 am – 3 pm at WDFW Mill Creek Office 1. Welcome, review notes, action items, agenda 2. Fish Facilities Operational Topics 3. Update on BRICC / License 4. Early-Implementation Activities 5. Fish Passage Update 6. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda & location  Baker River Project Relicense ARG Final Meeting Notes, 2/12/08  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 6 of 6    2008arg20080212.pdf en 