Baker River Project License Implementation Decision Record <ad> Aquatics Resource Group & Fish Passage Technical Working Group Wednesday, 29 April 2009, 9:30 a.m. - 10:40 a.m. ARG Lead: Arnie Aspelund, FPTWG Lead: Nick Verretto FPTWG Meeting Attendance and Conference Call Participants Arnie Aspelund (by phone) & Nick Verretto & Cary Feldmann (PSE), Ed Meyer & Steve Fransen (NOAA Fisheries), John Johnson (USFWS), Mark Hunter (WDFW), Stan Walsh (Skagit River System Cooperative), Dennis Dorratcague (MWH Americas), Ken Bates (Fish Passage Consulting) Question for Decision "Shall the operation date of the Lower Baker Floating Surface Collector be extended by one year, from March 1, 2012, to March 1, 2013, to permit design and performance improvement processes to occur?" Background A discussion regarding extension of the Lower Baker FSC start-up date of March 1, 2012, to March 1, 2013, was held at the March 17th FPTWG meeting at SeaTac. Additional discussion was held at the April 14th ARG meeting. Although participants agreed that a schedule extension of one year is in the best interest of the project (that the benefits of an additional year with a new FSC would be more than offset by improvements made through a more measured and inclusive design process, and that the additional year would put the project on a more reasonable path), a formal decision record was required. Given the time constraints of the design development, and consistent with the time of notification provision of Article 601, it was proposed that this decision be formalized in two weeks, at the April 29th FPTWG meeting. Notification of the decision date & format, and extension justification memo were submitted April 17, 2009. Consistent with the agencies' request, design & construction schedules for both start-up dates were submitted April 24, 2009. Discussion Summary Nick summarized previous FPTWG and ARG discussions, revisited compelling reasons for the one-year schedule extension (attached), and explained the detailed design & construction schedules for both startup dates (attached). Responses were previously submitted to PSE by Jon-Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe), Stan Zyskowski (NPS), and Alison Evans (WDOE), each supporting the one-year schedule extension. Rich Johnson (WDFW) concurred in consultation with Mark Hunter. Opinions of each of the agency and tribal representatives, and of Ken Bates, were elicited. The decision was made after these discussions. Decision <ad> All participants agreed on the one-year schedule extension. PSE and the FPTWG will proceed with the Lower Baker FSC design & construction schedule based on the modified start-up date of March 1, 2013.  Baker River Project License Implementation FSC Decision Record ARG, 04/29/09  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 1    2009arg20090429.pdf en 