Baker River Project License Implementation Draft Notes – Aquatics Resource Group Conference Call March 25, 2009, 9:30 a.m. - 10:15 a.m. ARG Lead: Arnie Aspelund, PSE (arnie.aspelund@pse.com); FPTWG Lead: Nick Verretto Present on Conference Call Arnie Aspelund, Nick Verretto, Frank Hella, Don Thompson, Jacob Venard, Tony Fuchs (PSE); Ed Meyer (NOAA Fisheries); Greta Movassaghi (USDA-FS); Devin Smith (Skagit River System Cooperative); Jon Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe); Arn Thoreen (Skagit Fisheries); Bob Helton (Citizen); Jeff McGowan (Skagit County) Question for Decision "Shall the Baker Project Adult Trap shutdown for trap reconstruction scheduled for Aug. 7, 2009 to Sep. 7, 2009 as agreed at the Aquatic Resources Group meeting (of 01/13/09), be extended to Sep. 17th (at the latest)" The question, as posed at the Jan. 13 ARG mtg, was later clarified by the contractor that there is no full-day shutdown required at any time within the work window. The in-water work will be performed in 10-hr shifts beginning at daylight, with trap operation occurring daily within the daylight period and overnight. Although likely unnecessary, the trap will be shut down during the work hours only if the in-water work is found to pose a potential hazard to fish within the trap. The exception is during one to two days near the end of the window, where the trap will be shut down during work hours to enter into the upstream trap wall for installation of the new 36” water line. All efforts are being made to compress the schedule and complete the work as early as possible, but the extended schedule is required to ensure adequate time to complete the work if field issues arise that prolong the work. Decision – Notification requirements were met, and e-mail responses noted. Participating ARG representatives on the phone and through e-mail notification agreed (consensus) to the in-water and trap work window and shutdown schedule timeframes (Aug. 7 – Sept 17) discussed at the Fish Passage Technical Working Group meeting of March 17th. PSE will proceed with the schedule and keep the ARG informed of progress. An agency/contact notification list has been established for any emergency unanticipated events during the work window. Discussion Nick summarized previous ARG and FPTWG discussions, then presented details of work within the work window. The in-water period will be Aug. 7, 2009 through Sep. 17, 2009. The interest is to keep the trap open and continue to trap and transport adult fish, except for a limited period of not more than 2 days toward the end of the work period. Responded Affirmatively by E-mail Steve Fransen (NOAA Fisheries); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Stan Zyskowski (NPS); Rich Johnson (WDFW); Alison Evans (WDOE); Jon Paul Shannahan (Upper Skagit Indian Tribe) Action Item  Nick – add Bob Helton to the contact notification list  Baker River Project License Implementation ARG Conference Call Notes, 3/25/09  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 1    2009arg20090325.pdf en 