Meeting Agenda November 30, 2009 / 9:30 a.m. / Burlington Skagit Service Center Call-in Information: 81-2500, 425-456-2500, 1-888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 996633 Meeting Password: 12345 Baker River Recreation & Aesthetics Resource Group Meeting Law Enforcement Plan Teamlet Meeting, License Article SA 318 Purpose: To develop a list of on-the-ground priorities to present at the February LEP meeting Invitees: Representatives from a variety of local Law Enforcement Agencies, RRG, TRIG, CRAG and PSE Date/Time: November 30 from 9:30a.m. - 1:30 p.m. in the Skagit Room, PSE Skagit Service Center A. 9:30-9:45 Review the Revised Draft Outline from October 20 meeting 1. Review the Common Vision and objectives identified in the Draft Outline B. 9:45-10:15 Develop a Work Plan for this teamlet based upon that vision 1. Identify goals for this meeting 2. Set up room logistics for work planning C. 10:15-11:15 Define Current coverages and abilities within Baker Project Boundary 1. Define current coverage by different agencies (what are current schedules for enforcement). 2. Determine agency jurisdictional coverage (what are you able to do, according to your credentials). 3. Determine what your current emphasis might be. 4. What are some standardized or common work practices that might apply to all agencies? D. 11:15-11:45 Identify necessary tools/equipment and manpower 1. By agency, what tools/equipment are essential for your work, in identified area? 2. By agency, what tools/equipment could be stored in a shared area? 3. By agency, what manpower coverage would be necessary to improve safety and efficiency? 4. Identify training gaps. E. 11:45-12:15 Lunch Break F. 12:15-1:00 Develop the list of on-the-ground activities for February LEP meeting. G. 1:00-1:15 February LEP Meeting Agenda H. 1:15-1:30 Evaluate Meeting Baker River Project, 2150 Recreation & Aesthetics Resources Group Law Enforcement Plan Teamlet Meeting November 30, 2009   Meeting Agenda November 30, 2009 / 9:30 a.m. / Burlington Skagit Service Center Meeting Location: Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center 1660 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Facilitator-Lyn Wiltse-cell-(425)-890-3613 Pam Garland-(360)-424-2912/cell (360)-661-2243 Driving Instructions: To drive to the Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center, in Burlington, please proceed as follows:  From I-5 North or South Take Exit 232 (Cook Rd Exit) onto the Cook Rd Proceed East to Stop light Turn right onto Old Hwy 99 and proceed approx 1.5 miles Turn left onto North Hill Blvd (Located in the Burlington Business Park between KIA and Pacific Coast Auto dealerships) Turn right Park Lane (second road on right) Go all the way to the end of Park Lane to PSE Skagit Service Center and parking is to the left of the gate Address is 1660 Park Lane, Burlington, WA 98233 Baker River Project, 2150 Recreation & Aesthetics Resources Group Law Enforcement Plan Teamlet Meeting November 30, 2009   Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes November 30, 2009, 9:30 am - 1:30 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com)-360-661-2243/360-424-2912  PRESENT Pam Garland, Mark Killgore (PSE); Sergio Capozzi by phone (AECOM); Jon Vanderheyden and Jeremy Smith (USFS); Sgt. Bill Heinck and Brock Applegate (WDFW); Jeff Turner (Whatcom County); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting)  NEXT MEETING DATE Tuesday, February 16, 2010 (immediately following the RRG meeting).  ACTION ITEMS Jeremy <ad> Reach out to Skagit County Officers regarding additional coverage. Pam <ad> Continue to encourage tribal input / review of LEP Management Plan. Pam <ad> Check on PSE helicopter landing coordinates and send out to all. Jon <ad> Check on USFS helicopter landing coordinates and send to Pam to distribute. Jeff <ad> Send Pam information on car trunk repeaters (price, recommended models), etc. Jeremy <ad> Send Pam information on winch / brush guard costs, etc. Sergio <ad> Send out Draft Management Plan to all by February 1, 2010. Sergio <ad> Send out Draft of Implementation Plan to all by February 1, 2010. All <ad> Send the OT rules and rates for your organization to Pam. Pam <ad> Send out an invitation to attend the next meeting on Tuesday, February 16 2010.  Funding Sources Pam explained that PSE has been paying for extra enforcement on holidays and opening fishing day. They have funded extra coverage with Whatcom County. She expects this practice to continue. This is not funded with relicensing monies.  As part of License Article 318 on law enforcement there is $22K in funding that we can decide how to spend once the Law Enforcement Plan is complete. These funds roll over to the next year if not spent.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG LEP Teamlet Final Meeting Notes November 30, 2009 Page 1 of 5  FERC Project NO. 2150   Since we are in the second year of license issuance, that amount has grown to $44K. There is also $73K designated for the USFS. Some funding may also be available from funding designated for the Cultural and Recreation Groups. We can petition for some of these funds without having completed the Law Enforcement Plan. Decisions on whether to grant petitions will be made by the working groups. This teamlet is a subset of the Recreation Working Group. CURRENT COVERAGES PSE funds extra coverage from Whatcom County for Opening Day Fishing and holidays. USFS Repeater Station trial Summer 2010 <ad> to increase communications coverage North end. MOAs with USFS and WDFW, DNR repeaters. WDFW can monitor Whatcom County and Skagit County frequencies. Jeremy is off duty Tuesday / Wednesday or Wednesday / Thursday. Jeff is off duty Sunday / Monday or Monday / Tuesday. Friday / Saturday they work pm shift. Try to both be available Friday / Saturday nights. USFS hires seasonals (Forest Protection Officers) <ad> can write some tickets (fees / resource damage), but do not have law enforcement commissions. Only water coverage (lake enforcement) is Jeff (no one else is boat certified to work with him) Jeff was out on the water 3 times last summer <ad> Whatcom County boat is old and is a liability. WDFW law enforcement officers were out on water twice. Most education is delivered verbally. WDFW has 2 officers upriver <ad> unscheduled. Informal communications among LEOs <ad> cell, email. Whatcom County put up new cell tower on Glover Mountain. WDFW, starting in 2009, has one (1) LEO for coverage for three counties for holidays. Many emergency calls are routed through PSE Operator (land line available). Engineering enforcement related issues (boulders are more effective than gates). Campground hosts have USFS radios <ad> patch through USFS / Whatcom County / DNR (Bergvall) dispatch Get CAD service up to milepost 22 or 23 (can run plates and send texts) Jeff is being furloughed for 1 week in 2009, 2010, and 2011 <ad> this leaves a big gap in coverage! OPPORTUNITIES TO CLOSE GAPS Note: Bolded items indicate priorities for the 2010 Recreation Season Set SOP for WDFW to notify Whatcom County when officer is in the area and what frequency they can be reached on. Contact Border Patrol about our activities. o USFS has MOU to establish communications with them Shared position with Parks? (NPS) o Opening Fishing? o Can write USFS tickets o Designated in Whatcom County  Baker River Project Relicense RRG LEP Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 30, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 5   Optimal to have 2 officers out together on weekend nights (Friday, Saturday). Improve coordination with Skagit County $ to train someone else <ad> marine training <ad> or redeploy WDFW staff (OT funding to accompany Jeff) Need boat Tribal connections? o Fisheries / elk / education Need to train officers to be proactive <ad> walk into camps / talk with folks Improve coordination with PSE Security o John Jensen Coordinate helicopter landing coordinates (PSE / USFS) Cell phone boosters for cars Install repeater in car trunk USFS doesn't have CAD System Winches and brush guards on vehicles (Whatcom County has / WDFW and USFS don't have) Flares Dedicated live bear trap (at Baker) Improve coverage (backfill for Jeff's furlough) o OT for USFS officers to fill gaps in coverage 2 snowmobiles o MOUs to cover maintenance and use (cost share) 2 quads (WDFW has quads) (Note: WDFW not pleased with performance of Polaris brand quads) o MOUs to cover maintenance and use (cost share)  MANAGEMENT PLAN Sergio explained that the main components of the Law Enforcement Management Plan are:  1. Coordination of the semi annual meetings (Feb/March timeframe and also November) a. We would review and revise the plan applying lessons learned from the previous season 2. Training 3. Implementation / Operations Plan  By our next meeting in February of 2010, Sergio explained that we will review a template that identifies the key decisions / details of implementation plans for discussion. Our discussions from this meeting will inform the template that we develop for the outline.  In the handout of the revised management plan Sergio pointed out that Appendix 1 captures the various stakeholder interests that we identified at our last meeting on October 20, 2009. He walked us through the revised outline. Our aim is to be clear about the next steps at our next meeting in February. We focused on Section 6 <ad> roles and responsibilities at the project. We also discussed the processes PSE will use to help law enforcement at the project.  The aim of the management plans is to capture a higher level view of what PSE will do for law enforcement. Brock (WDFW) mentioned that we should list details gathered and offered during the meetings that we would include in a plan, to an ongoing list. Before we finalize a draft management plan, the Law Enforcement Plan/ Recreational Resource Groups should revisit the list and determine which  Baker River Project Relicense RRG LEP Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 30, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 5   details the group should added to the management plan and which detail the group should add to the specific implementation plan. An ongoing list would record group members' ideas and thoughts and make the creation of both plans more collaborative as PSE could incorporate these ideas in the management plan's final draft or the preliminary outline for the implementation plan. Some of this includes the funding and annual activities. In creating procedures to support law enforcement, we discussed communication, resource protection patrols, and response protocols. Our semi annual meetings will help facilitate this. We need to ensure the attendance (in person or by phone) of agency folks who have responsibilities relative to law enforcement and resource protection to discuss a number of relevant items. Topics would include who has what coverage, protocols for sharing of information etc. Other ideas include periodic training sessions that different agency staff could take part in. Training might include cultural, terrestrial resource protections, etc. OPERATIONAL / IMPLEMENTATION PLAN We discussed what we would want to include in the more detailed implementation plan. Key elements would include: a recap of what is currently going on and what is being spent and what potentially might come from the license, detail of costs, etc. associated with additional patrols. We would also include priorities for equipment if there are still funds available and the possibility of using a grant or cost sharing with other entities. Jon reminded us that it will be important to tie the actions listed in the plan to the goals of the license article. Note: Mark pointed out that there may be key info that we want to keep out of the plans such as shifts officers are working, etc. For the implementation plan we may want to protect some info as a CEII (Critical Energy Infrastructure Information) document. Section 6: Roles We brainstormed the following general roles of the various stakeholders: USFS Roles: Resource protection (vegetation, fish and wildlife, habitat, etc) Law enforcement <ad> a number of authorized uses - administrative function Providing for public safety on National Forest lands (roads, trails) Law enforcement <ad> public and employee safety; protection of resource and property WDFW: Preserve, protect, perpetuate F&W in Washington State Resolve human and wildlife conflicts Provide for public safety Provide for recreational opportunities to extent possible (while doing the above) Enforce Title 77 (F&W code). Also commissioned to enforce all State laws <ad> general law enforcement authority WDNR Protection of natural sources Safeguard Public use of lands, including traffic, parking and sanitation management  Baker River Project Relicense RRG LEP Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 30, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 5   To provide professional, forward-looking stewardship of our state lands, natural resources, and environment.  To provide leadership in creating a sustainable future for the Trusts and all citizens.  Whatcom County Lead law enforcement authority in Whatcom County Enforce laws of state and county (county code) o Search and rescue / jail Protect life and property Protect natural resources Skagit County Lead law enforcement authority in Whatcom County Enforce laws of state and county (county code) o Search and rescue / jail Protect life and property Protect natural resources Town of Concrete Public safety around Lake Shannon Have law enforcement contract with Skagit County Upper Skagit Tribe Protection of cultural and historic resources Nooksack elk herd (?) Others? SRSC (Swinomish Indian Tribal Community and Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe) Protection of cultural and historic resources Nooksack elk herd (?) Others? REPORTING Sergio explained that the Annual Recreation Management Report calls for a stakeholder review period. It will highlight the actions taken that year and those planned to the coming year. HANDOUTS November 30, 2009 Meeting Agenda Law Enforcement Plan - Draft Outline/Framework Ideas for Law Enforcement Plan Procedures (Section 6.4)  Baker River Project Relicense RRG LEP Teamlet Final Meeting Notes, November 30, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 5 of 5    2009rrg20091130_lep.pdf en 