 Baker River Project License Implementation Meeting Title: Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Meeting Date: Tuesday June 16, 2009 Time: 9:30-2:00 Location: Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center 1660 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Facilitator-Lyn Wiltse-cell-(425)-890-3613 Pam Garland-(360)-424-2912/cell (360)-661-2243 AGENDA FOR RRG MEETING June 16, 2009 9:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Note: Estimated times are approximate. 9:30- 9:50 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 9:50-10:00 2. BRCC Update/Master Implementation and Reporting Schedule Review- (Cary) 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting (none at this time) 10:00-10:30 4. Resort Redeveloment Plan-status update  Review comments submitted for BLRP  Update status of Cultural Review  Decommissioning Plan review  Next steps  Resort Redevelopment Schedule 10:30-10:45 5. Break 10:45-11:30 6. Plan Development and schedule (Sergio Capozzi)  Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (BRRWSP)  Aesthetics Management Plan  Law Enforcement Plan (LEP)-Law Enforcement Meeting at 2:00 p.m. 11:30-12:00 7. Working lunch 12:00-12:15 8. Review Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Agenda 12:15-12:30 9. Discuss any upcoming decisions  BLRP  Final Review of BRRWSP 12:30-12:45 10. Evaluate meeting and set August 18 Agenda NEW ACTION ITEMS (From April 21 meeting notes)  Dave Coordinate w/ Rich Johnson to identify WDFW reps to BRCC & RRG.  Pam Send out directions to PSE Skagit Office in Burlington along with June 16 agenda.  Jamie Add the old project boundary line to drawings and give Elizabeth the latest version of all the resort development drawings.  Pam Send out Jim Eychaner’s comments on Water Safety Plan to all and copy Sergio.  Sergio By April 24 send out revised drafts of Water Safety and Resort Redevelopment plans for all to review.  All Review Water Safety Plan that Pam emailed out on March 31. Let her know if you need her to re-send it to you. Send her your comments on the plan by May 12.  All Review Resort Redevelopment plan and send Pam your comments by May 22.  Pam Send out revised draft Resort Re-development plan to all by April 29.  Pam Send out all comments on plans as you receive them.  Pam Send Sergio decommissioning document.  Ann When possible, send Pam detailed engineering email to support Greta’s Oct. 2008 decommissioning letter.  Dave Contact Bill Hebner (WDFW) re consultation on the Law Enforcement Plan – possible to attend a meeting on June 16? Copy the Working Group.  Pam Set up Law Enforcement Plan initial consultation to coincide with meeting on June 16 if possible. Include Concrete, Whatcom Co., Skagit Co., Jeremy Smith of USFS, Baker Operators, Plant manager, etc. Send out instructions for how to get to Burlington PSE Office for that meeting. Lyn Check with Stan about tribal participation in the Law Enforcement Plan meeting on June 16 (done). He will check with Ted – it is unlikely that they would attend PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Pam-Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E). CONFERENCE CALL INFORMATION: Dial in from your phone: Meeting Place Main Number 425-456-2500 Internal Number 81-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 12345 Password: 12345 Driving Instructions: To drive to the Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center, in Burlington, please proceed as follows:  From I-5 North or South  Take Exit 232 (Cook Rd Exit) onto the Cook Rd  Proceed East to Stop light  Turn right onto Old Hwy 99  Proceed South for 1.5 miles  Turn left onto North Hill Blvd (Located in the Burlington Business Park between KIA and Pacific Coast Auto dealerships)  Turn right Park Lane (second road on right)  Go all the way to the end of Park Lane to PSE Skagit Service Center and parking is to the left of the gate Address is 1660 Park Lane, Burlington, WA 98233 Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes June 16, 2009, 9:30 am - 2:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland and Cary Feldmann, (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Paula Mann (Town of Concrete); Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council); Sergio Capozzi by phone (EDAW) and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT RRG MEETING DATES August 19, 2009 meeting at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington October 20, 2009 at WDFW Office in Mill Creek NEW ACTION ITEMS  Pam Send Sergio decommissioning document.  Pam Hold off sending out Resort Redevelopment Plan (for formal review) for review to all.  All Send comments on Water Safety Plan to Pam by July 6. We plan to get it out by end of July to begin the formal review. The revised plan will go out to start the formal 30 day review the end of July.  Cary Encourage a meeting between Jon and Greta and Kim and Ed re whether the decommissioning of the resort can / should proceed without FERC’s approval. This also seems to be a legal question. We have an aggressive schedule to meet. Currently decommissioning is in the redevelopment plan, so if that is help up then we won’t be able to start decommissioning in September. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E) – (ongoing). Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 16, 2009 Page 1 of 4 APPROVAL OF APRIL 21, 2009 MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft April Meeting notes without edits. BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that the BRCC did not meet last two months. They are considering moving to perhaps a quarterly meeting schedule. PSE has periodically sent out a written update of the activities of each of the resource working groups to all in lieu of the meetings. The next meeting is scheduled to be June 24. PSE is also looking at hosting a formal walk-through of the license to assist new-comers (and refresh old- timers) in their understanding of the document. It may be beneficial for PSE and the USFS to meet together to walk through the license to explore cross-resource responsibilities. It would be helpful to come to a meeting of the minds about responsibilities and deliverables. An example of differing interpretations is the timing of funding and plan development. This could help promote dialogue between and within each organization. This could help us implement in a way that is both effective and efficient. It would also be helpful to agree on communication protocols. RESORT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN UPDATE Review Comments After the last meeting Pam sent out the draft Resort Redevelopment Plan. So far comments have been received from: the State Recreation and Conservation Office, Town of Concrete, NCCC, and the USFS. Sergio explained that all comments have been incorporated into the plan (see Appendix 1) that Pam sent out on June 12. Next step: Putting together the implementation plan (incl. decommissioning plan, site design drawings and narrative plan, and concurrency review. Sergio will hold off on sending the resort Redevelopment Plan out for formal review until he hears from Pam on the issues of separating the decommissioning plan from the overall plan. Decommissioning Plan The Decommissioning Plan was signed off by Ed Schild in Kim Lane’s Absence. It was sent on June 3 to the Forest for concurrence. The decommissioning letter that PSE sent followed closely the Forest Service language in the letter that was sent from Jon Vanderheyden to Ed Schild, on October 20, 2008, re USFS standards for decommissioning. It included the drawing for the decommissioning and a corresponding cost estimate. It also includes hazmat abatement costs (e.g., decommissioning the generators, etc.) Pam has not heard anything back yet. We want begin the decommissioning in September. This is part of a plan that will go to FERC. The understanding is that we need to move on this as quickly as possible. Once the plan has been approved, we would do the decommissioning work and then the remainder of the funding would follow in 2010 for the redevelopment. Greta has requested a meeting to determine what specifically those credits will be. Question: Submit the Resort Redevelopment Plan prior to beginning de-commissioning? Can the decommissioning proceed without FERC’s approval? Sergio suggested keeping it in the plan but add some language that makes the decommissioning pursuant to the Special Use Authorization and approval of the plan. If the plan were submitted to the FERC today, it would require at least 90 days for approval. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 16, 2009 Page 2 of 4 The best way to proceed may be to call the decommissioning out as a separate matter to be approved between the Forest Service and PSE. Status of Cultural Review Ann did a great presentation last month to the CRAG last month. We used web ex technology which worked out well. At that meeting, CRAG members determined an Ares of Potential Effect (APE). It was requested that we respect a 50 foot buffer as well outside of that boundary. They did find a 1995 survey that did the lakeshore area where the cabins are. They are not going to re- survey that. Northwest Archaeological Associates will be out soon doing additional surveys within the APE that had not been recently surveyed. The tribes have been invited to participate in those surveys. The surveys should be complete in about a week. The intent is they will send us an authorization to proceed. Next Steps / Schedule  The Design Narrative is out for review. Ann reported that it looks pretty good. It also includes the Vegetation Management Plan which is complete. She thinks it is ready to be signed.  Pam will send out the Resort Redevelopment Plan for all.  We will aim to have all the plans complete by the end of July. This is contingent on the finalization of the Decommissioning Plan. Review of Draft Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan Sergio explained that Pam sent this plan out for review since the last meeting. To date, The RCO has submitted comments. Aesthetics Management Plan Putting together a draft plan – will be getting it out for informal review in July. Pam reported that they received some native plant lists from the TRIG and are planning to incorporate more information on these from the USFS. Law Enforcement Plan Pam walked us through the agenda for this meeting. It looks like it will be well attended. Most agencies have indicated that they will be sending at least one representative. The tribes have also been invited and have indicated interest in attending. Next Agenda  BRCC Update  Review the Master Implementation Schedule and the Master Reporting Schedule  Resort Redevelopment Plan Update o Status of Cultural Review o Decommissioning Plan Review o Resort Redevelopment schedule o Water Safety Plan o Aesthetics Management Plan o Proposal for Concurrence o Law Enforcement Plan (report from June 16 meeting) Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 16, 2009 Page 3 of 4 o Draft design narrative and vegetation management  Discuss Upcoming Decisions o BLRP o Final Review of BRRWSP  Evaluate Meeting  Set October 20 Meeting Agenda Handouts  April 21 Notes and June 16 Agenda  Draft Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Agenda Meeting Evaluation Worked Well:  Frank discussions  Abundance of good food  Frequency of meetings!  Sergio’s guidance via phone!  Accomplished all our Action Items from the last meeting  Pam’s responsiveness and diligence between these meetings Do Differently:  Broader attendance  We will meet again at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington for our next meeting in August  Make use of Web Ex technology? Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 16, 2009 Page 4 of 4  