BAKER RIVER PROJECT LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting August 6th, 2009 (9:00 p.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from July 2nd, 2009 meeting. 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities and License review/issues. License/BRCC update Review TRIG Norms (ongoing as needed) - Tony TRIG budget <ad> Kim and Tony 3. Decisions Required at Today's Meeting: Yes 1. Decision Item #1: Shall the TRIG permit property acquisition funding to be borrowed from one or more of Articles 502, 503, or 504 to be temporarily utilized for property acquisition by any of those articles with the provision that such funds would be restored to the borrowed fund by the borrowing fund at a later date when such funds are available to the borrowing fund? This borrowing provision is available if the total funding request does not exceed cumulative available funding scheduled for those articles at the time of the request. 2. Decision Item #2: Should PSE proceed (based on price limits, schedule, and terms of negotiation set by TRIG on August 6th, 2009) to negotiate and make an offer to acquire property Y as previously identified by the TRIG to satisfy part of the land acquisition needs for Article 503 (Elk Habitat), and potentially Article 502 (Forest Habitat) and Article 504 (Wetland Habitat)? Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend. 4. Land Acquisition Update Property Y Update (field trip results, Forest and Wetland discussion, decision) <ad> Ira, Scott, Haley Report on "new" alternative properties <ad> Ira, Tony Discussion regarding pooling of funds to acquire lands <ad> Don, Cary and Marty 5. TRMP plans update Review updated TRMP implementation schedule - Marty Updates on plans <ad> Haley, Tony, Kathy, Mel, Marty, and Scott 6. Loon/Osprey Implementation Update Progress <ad> Haley and Mel BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027   7. Decisions list Review draft language, prepare for decision at next meeting 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (Sept. 3rd, 2009) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027   Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes  August 6, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 3:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Jacob Venard, Scott Heller, and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Kuntz (NPS); Lou Ellyn Jones by phone (USFWS); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Brock Applegate (WDFW); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA).  DECISIONS Decision #1: Shall the TRIG permit property acquisition funding to be borrowed from one or more of Articles 502, 503, or 504 to be temporarily utilized for property acquisition by any of those articles, with the provision that such funds would be restored to the borrowed fund by the borrowing fund at a later date when such funds are available to the borrowing fund? This borrowing provision is available if the total funding request does not exceed cumulative available funding scheduled for those articles at the time of the request.  The TRIG agreed that a quorum was present, and the following proxies were announced: Bob Kuntz represented USFS and TNC, and Stan Walsh noted that he represented both the Sauk-Seattle and Swinomish Tribes. Decision #1 was approved by consensus of all present.   The second decision item listed in the agenda was postponed to a conference call Monday, Aug. 24  CONFERENCE CALL ABOUT PROPERTY Y: Monday, Aug. 24 at either 10 a.m. or 1 pm (Tony to confirm) NEXT MEETING: Sept.3, and hold 1st Thurs for monthly or every other month meetings (workload dependent)  ACTION ITEMS   Tony Schedule a conference call August 24 at either 10 a.m. or 1 p.m.   Tony Email conference call announcement to full TRIG with text of the proposed Property Y decision   Brock Convene folks interested in Article 504 (Wetlands) to determine maximum contributions and  related parameters for the purchase of Property Y   Bob K Convene folks interested in Article 502 (Forest) to determine maximum contributions and related  parameters for the purchase of Property Y   Tony Fax "straw dog" proposal for the purchase of Property Y to Lou Ellyn (and others upon request)   All  Make note of the Aug. 24 conference call and call Tony if you would like him to fax you a copy of  the "straw dog" text that was developed and distributed in hard copy at the Aug. 6 meeting   Haley Email loon / osprey observation data to full TRIG  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS   Tony Look into setting up your laptop for WebX and work w/ tech re: TRIG FTP site   Kim  Email BRCC funding handout (from April BRCC meeting) to TRIG   Kim  Work on simplified budget report sheet, provide to TRIG when available   Tony Add language to memorialize "good faith effort" to the decision list   UPDATE ON ACTION ITEMS Pooling of funds for land acquisition: The group reviewed Don's 7/13/09 email re: the pooling of funds for acquisition, and agreed by consensus that pooling funds to purchase lands that meet more than one license article is possible. Decisions to do so would need to be made on a case-by-case basis and would necessitate appropriate documentation and tracking of funds.  Simplified budget report: Kim has developed a draft budget reporting mechanism that he would like to use for all resource groups; he will bring it to the TRIG once the BRCC has had the opportunity to review and approve it.  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE The next BRCC meeting is scheduled for September 23 and includes a review of the license in the afternoon.  LAND ACQUISITION The group reviewed and discussed proposed decision #1 regarding the borrowing of money between Articles 502, 503, and 504 for land acquisition. It was adopted by consensus agreement of all members / proxies present.  The group reviewed and discussed proposed decision #2 regarding the purchase of Property Y. The folks who have been onsite answered questions about the property, and the group talked at length about the breakdown of habitat within the parcel. Bob K. noted that NPS has a lot of interest in the use of 502 funds, with the hope of acquiring cottonwood to support migratory birds. Lou Ellyn noted the value of buying "connected" land that is adjacent to other protected land given the likelihood and habitat impact of future development.  After much discussion, the group deferred this decision in order to give TRIG members time to confer with their constituencies about the parameters for total cost and the possible division of that cost between article funds.  To protect the confidentiality of our land acquisition process and strategy, a "straw dog" proposal for the total maximum sale price and contributions from each article fund was hand written, photocopied, and distributed in hard copy to attendees. Tony will fax this to Lou Ellyn and can fax it to other TRIG members upon request.  TRIG decided to reword the proposed decision language (see below) and come together via a conference call on Monday, August 24 to come to consensus regarding Property Y.  Proposed decision for August 24 conference call: Should PSE proceed (based on price limits, schedule, and terms of negotiation set forth by the TRIG) to negotiate and make an offer to acquire Property Y as identified by the TRIG to satisfy part of the land acquisition needs for Articles 503, 504, and potentially 502 (with specific contribution amounts from each article as set forth by the TRIG)?  TRMP UPDATE AND SCHEDULE Marty and Haley walked the group through a spreadsheet of the comments received to date, focusing resolving any comments that conflict with each other, the license, or previous edits. Haley sent this spreadsheet out to the full TRIG yesterday (8/5). Any additional comments will need to be received by next Wednesday in order to be included in the final draft, which will be sent out via certified mail for the formal review period. Haley will also email a PDF of each plan with track changes visible to make review easier.  LOON / OSPREY NESTING PLATFORM UPDATE Haley will email the loon / osprey observation data to the TRIG and a report on the same will be added to the September 3 meeting agenda.  September 3, 2009 Agenda: Land Acquisition Update, o Property Y update o "new alternate" property and other options BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 8/6/09 Notes, Page 2 of 3   TRMP & Other Plans Decisions list - review draft language Budget Report Loon / Osprey Report Handouts: 6/4/09 Notes & 8/6/09 Agenda Status of Baker River Project Terrestrial Resource Plans, 8/6/09 Terrestrial Plan Comment and Response Summary, 8/5/2009 MEETING EVALUATION What worked well:  Great land acquisition discussion Good traffic Do differently: TRMP review squeezed for time Ran late  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 8/6/09 Notes, Page 3 of 3    2009trig20090806.pdf en 