Recreation Resource Group (RRG) Meeting Norms, updated 2/24/09 Official Meeting Procedures (prescribed by settlement) 1) Licensee convenes meeting annually and as needed at a mutually agreed location. 2) 10 day notice 3) Agenda with notice 4) Licensee keep membership list current 5) Licensee chairs meetings 6) Licensee records votes 7) Votes taken after a two week notice period (if no consensus is reached) 8) Neutral Notetaker (if desired by group) take notes to record meeting 9) Neutral Notetaker Distribute notes to the group. 10) Quorum (A quorum for a meeting of the BRCC, shall include at least one representative, or proxy, of each of the following to be present: licensee, the federal agencies (USDA-FS, USFWS, NPS, NOAA Fisheries), the state agencies (WDOE, WDFW, DNR), and the tribes (SSIT, SITC, USIT). A quorum in necessary to conduct business. 11) Only a member of the Resource Group may make a proposal for a decision, although this is not intended to preclude the source of the proposal coming from a person or entity other than a member as long as a Resource Group member sponsors the proposal Operational Norms (optional by agreement, and to be reviewed/revised periodically) A. Location and time 1) The group generally meets every other month on the 3rd Tuesday, unless the 3rd Tuesday follows a Monday holiday (in those cases, the meeting is rescheduled to a mutually-agreed date) 2) At a mutually agreed location 3) Starting time variable by location, generally 9:30 a.m. to allow for long commutes B) Meeting Conduct 1) Our aim is for our meetings to start and end on time (may end early). 2) Allow members to introduce new topics at the meeting as needed (voting will follow settlement protocol). 3) Catch up late comers at breaks. 4) Take breaks as needed for implementation. 5) Have regular updates re: the schedule. 6) Use Parking Lot to “park” ideas to be addressed at a later date. 7) Celebrate diverse opinions. 8) Celebrate (even small) accomplishments. 9) For the benefit of members participating by phone, identify yourself as you begin to speak. 10) Phone participants will verbally signal a desire to be heard. 11) Facilitator / Team Leader will ensure callers are able to participate effectively. 12) Call Facilitator or Team Leader as needed the morning of the meeting if running late of there is a change in your plan to attend. C) Meeting Notes 1) At a minimum, notes will include: agenda with timing of topics, list of attendees, action items, decisions made. 2) Draft notes will be distributed via email with hard copies available upon request within 3 business days of meeting. 3) Suggested changes to the draft notes that are accepted by consensus of team members will be indicated in the subsequent version in italics and acknowledgement of the source of the revision. These revisions will be submitted to the Team Leader within 2 weeks of receiving the notes and will be discussed/ approved at the start of the following meeting. 4) Other suggested changes will not be integrated into the body of the notes. Instead, they will be appended to the notes separately. Final Meeting Norms for Recreation Resource Group (RRG), Updated February 24, 2009 1 D) Attendance at Meetings 1) When you cannot attend in person, a conference line will be provided (open 5 notes before meeting begins) 2) Designated alternates / proxies may represent the member. E) Decision Making Processes 1) Decisions are by consensus or by decision-making protocol described in the settlement agreement. 2) Licensee is responsible to document decisions through the meeting notes. F) Team Leader Responsibilities 1) Team leader will send out a meeting announcement with agenda 10 days prior to each meeting. Agendas will indicate the approximate time each item will be discussed. Team leader will also send out any meeting handouts one week prior to each meeting, when available. 2) Team leader will send out “hot off the press” handouts by the end of the business day prior to the meeting. 3) Team leader brings extra hard copies of meeting notes and handouts to each meeting. 4) Team leader will bring a conference call phone to each meeting and publish call-in instructions on each meeting agenda. The call-in line will remain open for the duration of the meeting. 5) Team leader will send draft notes to all members within five business days of the meeting. 6) Team leader will make an effort to coordinate meeting dates to maximize participation. 7) Post documents on the PSE Baker re-license website (as decided by the team). 8) Team Leader will call members to announce last minute cancellation of meeting due to inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstances. G) PSE Facilitation Duties 1) Facilitation will be provided as needed. 2) When facilitated, facilitator shall: i) Ensure agenda topics are covered effectively and efficiently. ii) Manage the timing of agenda topics according to the expressed need of participants who are not able to attend the entire meeting (see Section I, #1 below). iii) Check with meeting participants on “real time notes” to ensure correctness. iv) Start each meeting by reviewing/revising previous notes and proposed agenda. v) Facilitate speaking order, according to the order participants indicate (by signaling visually or “beeping” if participating by phone). vi) Do a quick evaluation at end of each meeting. H) Neutral Notetaker Duties (if selected by group) 1) Writes “real-time” notes on flip chart during meeting. 2) Transcribe “real-time” notes to record of meeting. 3) Distribute notes to the group (through the Team Leader). I) Meeting Participant Responsibilities 1) Notify the facilitator if you have special interest in a particular agenda topic and want to phone-in or attend in person during discussion of that topic. Agree on a time when you think you can attend. 2) If making a presentation distribute corresponding hard copies of the presentation to facilitate note taking for the other participants. 3) Participants need to RSVP to Team Leader at least two days before scheduled meeting. 4) Complete assigned Action Items in timely manner. 5) Call the team leader to confirm meeting will occur as scheduled during inclement weather. 6) Respect confidentiality wherever possible. 7) Put yourself in the other person’s shoes (work to understand each other’s perspectives). 8) Respect each other’s interests (they cannot be challenged). 9) Be honest and kind at the same time. 10) Be informed and respectful. Final Meeting Norms for Recreation Resource Group (RRG), Updated February 24, 2009 2  