 BAKER RIVER PROJECT LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting February 5th, 2009 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from January 8th, 2009 meeting. 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities and New License review/issues.  License/BRCC update  Review decision / agreement / milestones list  Review TRIG Norms/TRIG budget – Tony, Cary 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: None 1. Decision Item #1: None 4. Land Acquisition Update  Property Y Update, Alternate properties list – Ira and Tony  Reed Canary Grass management – Tony, Dave  Criteria matrix - Anna  Draft proposal for multi-article properties update - Anna, Cary 5. TRMP plans update  Carex flava & Plants of Special Status Plans - Anna and Kathy  Review TRMP (Article 501) and updated TRMP implementation schedule - Marty  Status of Legacy Wood plan, bald eagle night roost survey field trip - Haley 6. Loon Update  Progress - Anna 7. Baker Lake Resort redevelopment teamlet discussion – last hour?  Cross-resource meeting with the RRG folks on tree removal issues - Haley 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (March 5th, 2009) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes February 5, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Anna Kopitov, Cary Feldmann, Mel Walters, Kim Lane, Ira McDaniel, and Pam Garland (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group); Bob Nelson, Ray Croswell, and Bill Richardson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); Todd Wilbur (Swinomish); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS – None NEXT TRIG MEETING: March 5, 2009, First Thursdays through 2009 ACTION ITEMS  All - Review Carex flava and Plants of Special Status plans, send comments to Anna  All - Email Anna ASAP if you would like to review the Carex flava study RFP  All - Review draft list of TRIG agreements and decisions (Tony will email), reply to Tony with additions, edits  Anna - Email updated Habitat Matrix to TRIG  Anna - Email draft loon signs to all for review  Kim - Work w/ Cary re: simplified budget report sheet  Marty - Update pre-acquisition checklist to include estimated land ownership costs  Marty - Create draft language that reflects today’s discussion of who pays the routine costs of land ownership (ex: property taxes, road maintenance); run it by Cary & Tony  Tony - Email TRIG Norms to Jamie for “grammatical clean-up”  Tony - Email draft list of TRIG agreements and decisions and draft language re: routine costs of land ownership to all for review prior to March TRIG meeting  Tony - Forward Kathy’s email (elk forage studies) to all for reference  Tony - Coordinate location for April meeting (Lacy?) PREVIOUS – STILL RELEVANT – ACTION ITEMS  PSE - Continue to work on the funding agreement and tracking process w/ USFS Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 FINAL Meeting Notes, 2/5/2009 Page 1 of 5  Dave - Bring information on forage seed mix prescriptions / costs to Feb. mtg  Dave - Talk with WDFW land mgr and Mike (Hurns Field) re: Reed Canary Grass BRCC / LICENSE UPDATES BRCC met January 28 by conference call. This meeting officially chartered the BRCC and its resource groups - ARG, CRAG, TRIG, and RRG (as described in the license). Cary described how Paul (at the BRCC meeting) shared a recap of a recent FERC / PSE meeting to coordinate the transition from licensing to compliance. Paul presented information to FERC about the project overview, license articles, early-implementation activities, the 2009 plan for the hatchery and adult fish trap, the longer-term schedules for the powerhouse and lower baker FSC, the connection between licensing activities and dam safety, and PSE’s compliance program. At that meeting, FERC indicated a sense of confidence in PSE’s ability to implement the license, and PSE came away with an action item to propose a way to clarify the articles with overlapping naming / numbering issues in the license. Cary shared that the need for agencies to formally identify their representatives to the BRCC and resource groups was discussed at the last BRCC meeting, and the responses are coming in now. The simplified budget report was also discussed at the BRCC meeting; Kim Lane is working on this and we anticipate seeing a draft at our March meeting. We welcomed the new PSE License Implementation Manager, Kim Lane, who is replacing Paul Wetherbee in this position. The RMEF also has a new Lands Program Manager for Washington and Oregon in Bill Richardson, whom we also welcomed to the meeting. Re: the routine costs of land ownership, the group discussed a variety of “what ifs.” Marty will draft a proposal to capture the intent of the discussion, will run it by Cary and Tony, and Tony will email it to the full TRIG for review and discussion at the March meeting. NORMS We reviewed and edited the draft TRIG norms in real time. Jamie will edit the draft for grammatical consistency and Tony will distribute them with these notes. LAND ACQUISITION Ira provided an update on the status of Property Y, and confirmed that he has had a follow-up conversation with the owners of Property X (no status change). Ray shared that he and Ira spent yesterday reviewing other possible parcels; more information will be presented at the March TRIG meeting. Reed Canary Grass: Dave wasn’t able to bring the WDFW data to this meeting, so the team will review this information at the March meeting. Bill (RMEF) has had some experience with managing Reed Canary Grass. He noted that while older, decadent Reed Canary Grass is not palatable, elk do eat emergent RCG plants and it does have some forage value in the emergent stage. He recommended the team contact Steve Smith (USFWS biologist, Finley National Wildlife Refuge, Corvallis, OR) for more information about this. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 FINAL Meeting Notes, 2/5/2009 Page 2 of 5 Re: forage values, Kathy did locate the studies discussed at the January TRIG meeting and emailed links to Tony. The group noted limitations in both studies: neither study reviewed non- forested land, and they were limited to a comparison of the vegetation already on-site in the study locations. Because of this, they do not provide comprehensive information, but they may be useful as a reference. Tony will forward Kathy’s email to the full TRIG to make it easy to find these references in future. Anna offered to create a table showing the comparative values of the vegetation listed in the studies; the team decided that was not needed at this time. HABITAT MATRIX Anna was delayed by a broken arm last month, so she will email the updated Habitat Matrix draft to the TRIG before the next TRIG meeting for review. We will discuss in March MULTI-ARTICLE PROPERTY ACQUISITION Draft language isn’t ready yet, so this item was moved to the March meeting. Carex flava and Plants of Special Status Plans The draft plans are out; please review and send comments to Anna. We will review comments and edits at the March meeting. Anna also noted that the RFP for the Carex flava study is ready to go out; if you would like to review it, let Anna know ASAP. TRMP Cary noted that the TRMP has a fairly short turn-around time (draft currently due April 1). Article 501 (TRMP) is a reporting article, which is connected to the other terrestrial articles and describes the TRMP as an over-arching / connective reporting mechanism. Crafting the TRMP this way would, by necessity, need to reference the other plans (which are not yet done or due). Because of this, Cary proposed requesting an extension for Article 501 (501 only), so that the other articles’ plans could be completed first. This would not change the need to comply with the intent of 501 or the other articles. If the group supports this recommendation, TRIG would need to make that decision and PSE would need to distribute the alternate schedule proposal for a formal 30-day review prior to submitting it to FERC. We will discuss this further at the March meeting, and PSE will work with Marty to proceed with a high level TRMP as a backup plan in case the TRIG does not choose to support a request for extension. Haley reported that the Legacy Wood Plan draft is underway; she hopes to have it ready to review at the March meeting. The Eagle Night Roost field trip is scheduled for Monday, Feb. 9, to identify survey locations. LOON UPDATE Anna reminded the team that two loon platforms will be installed in Baker Lake. Construction of the platforms is nearly done and Anna is working with the USFS on signage for five boat ramps around Baker Lake. She will email the current drafts to the TRIG. Collaboration between resource groups Ann, USFS, noted that – in addition to the resort redevelopment planning - the RRG has other Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 FINAL Meeting Notes, 2/5/2009 Page 3 of 5 articles that overlap TRIG activities, including the law enforcement and boating safety articles. The group agreed that we need to stay aware of opportunities to collaborate with the other resource groups. BAKER LAKE RESORT REDEVELOPMENT REVIEW W/ RRG Pam Garland (Recreation Resource Group team leader) introduced Ann Dunphy (USFS) and Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Group, Landscape Architects) to walk the group through the redevelopment planning to date. The original resort along the old Baker Lake went underwater when the dam was build and the reservoir created. Some of the buildings were salvaged and moved to their current location at that time. The settlement agreement called for turning the resort over to the USFS, and the redevelopment is intended to make the facility align with USFS operations. The current draft plans address several issues; highlights include:  Clarification of vehicle circulation through the grounds (reducing the looping required to find a particular site)  Increased day use options  Separation of day use areas from camping areas  Reduced density / sites (current density is at commercial resort levels)  Minimized impact on sensitive areas  Elimination of cabins to create true campground  Adds power / water spigots rather than separate RV hookups  Maintains the store, which has historical value, provides a communication hub, and could be used for I/E purposes  Clarifies parking (increases vehicle control to limit vehicle impact to the grounds)  Improves signage  Provides appropriate turning radiuses for large vehicles Agency consult: comments / questions: USFWS Consultation re: Baker Resort Redevelopment  Surveys were required by the Bi-op since plans for the resort were not developed enough for the USFWS to make a determination at that that time  If the area was assumed to be occupied habitat, the survey requirement could be waived  The whole Resort area is considered suitable habitat  In the May site visit the plans involved removal of 2-3 conifers  Now with new tree surveys and identification of hazard trees, more trees will be removed.  there are 33 conifers being removed for construction with a dbh (diameter at breast height) of >12”  there are 9 conifers to be removed for aesthetics with a dbh of >12”  Problem with this- the buffer area will be opened up, making the area of potential habitat more vulnerable to wind throw and predation.  Along the shoreline- pruning okay  Hazard tree removal- many hazard trees are dead already and pose safety risks in the campground  Some hazard trees may also be potential nest trees Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 FINAL Meeting Notes, 2/5/2009 Page 4 of 5  Two issues: 1. Construction removal due to redevelopment, and 2. Hazard tree removal for safety reasons (not part of redevelopment, would happen anyway). Next Steps:  Lou Ellyn- take plans back to Deanna and review  Jamie – re-work the design of the turn-around to try to eliminate the removal of the large tree  Ann- email the Hazard Tree Criteria used to identify the hazard trees at the resort  Haley – plan a site visit for WDFW and USFWS MEETING EVALUATION: Went Well  Peanut Butter Pie and Deviled Eggs  Great attendance  Welcome Kim and Bill!  Good interactivity and dialogue Do differently  Send Marty an email if you have any requests for different food options HANDOUTS  Agenda and January 2009 meeting notes AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING March 5, 2009; 9 am – 2 pm, Mill Creek 1. Welcome, review agenda, notes, and action items 2. Decisions: a. Review decision / agreement / milestones list b. Carex flava & Plants of Special Status Plans – Review comments 3. BRCC / licensing Update 4. Approve TRIG Norms 5. Review TRIG budget (Kim, Tony, Cary) 6. Elk land acquisition update: a. Reed Canary Grass management (Tony, Dave) b. Review draft language re: routine costs of land ownership (Cary, Marty) c. Alternate Properties (Ray & Ira) 7. Review draft proposal for multi-article properties (Anna, Cary) 8. Review TRMP (Article 501) and updated TRMP implementation schedule 9. Review draft plan / criteria for Legacy Wood (Haley) 10. Loon Update and Photos (Anna) 11. Eagle Night Roost Survey field visit report (Haley) 12. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda and location PARKING LOT: Develop protocol for pre-acquisition field visit Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 FINAL Meeting Notes, 2/5/2009 Page 5 of 5  