Baker River Project License Implementation Meeting Title:  Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Meeting Date: Tuesday September 15, 2009 Time: 9:30-2:00 Location: Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center 1660 Park Lane Burlington, WA 98233 Facilitator-Lyn Wiltse-cell-(425)-890-3613 Pam Garland-(360)-424-2912/cell (360)-661-2243  AGENDA FOR RRG MEETING September 15, 2009 9:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Note: Estimated times are approximate. 9:30- 9:50 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 9:50-10:00  2. BRCC Update/Master Implementation and Reporting Schedule Review- (Cary/Kim)  10:00-10:15  3. Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan-Formal review ends 09/14 Review comments from 30-day formal review  10:15-10:30  4. Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan-Formal review ends 09/19 Review Comments from 30-day formal review 5. Decisions to be made at today’s meeting (2) a) BRRWSP-Once comments have been incorporated, can the plan be approved to submit to FERC? b) BLRP-Once comment period is complete and comments have been incorporated into the plan, can the plan be approved to submit to FERC? 6. Break  10:30-10:50  10:50-11:00 11:00-11:30  7. Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Implementation a) Update Status of Cultural review (Pam) b) Decommissioning Plan and Schedule (Pam) c) Redevelopment Schedule (Ann) 11:30-12:00 8. Working Lunch a) Review Law Enforcement Meeting notes from June 16, 09 (Lyn) b) Plan Break out for Law Enforcement Plan Outline (Lyn)   12:00-1:00  9. Law Enforcement Plan Break Out/Brainstorm  1:00-1:30 10. Recreation Implementation Schedule (Pam & Ann) Article 305 (Pam) 1:30-1:45 11. Evaluate Meeting/Plan October 20 Meeting NEW ACTION ITEMS (From June 16 meeting notes)  Pam Send Sergio decommissioning document.  Pam Hold off sending out Resort Redevelopment Plan (for formal review) for review to all.  All Send comments on Water Safety Plan to Pam by July 6. We plan to get it out by end of July to begin the formal review. The revised plan will go out to start the formal 30 day review the end of July. Cary Encourage a meeting between Jon and Greta and Kim and Ed re whether the decommissioning of the resort can / should proceed without FERC’s approval. This also seems to be a legal question. We have an aggressive schedule to meet. Currently decommissioning is in the redevelopment plan, so if that is help up then we won’t be able to start decommissioning in September  PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Pam-Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E). CONFERENCE CALL INFORMATION: Dial in from your phone: Meeting Place Main Number 425-456-2500 Internal Number 81-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484  Meeting ID: 091509 Password: 12345  Driving Instructions: To drive to the Puget Sound Energy, Skagit Service Center, in Burlington, please proceed as follows:  From I-5 North or South  Take Exit 232 (Cook Rd Exit) onto the Cook Rd  Proceed East to Stop light  Turn right onto Old Hwy 99 and proceed approx 1.5 miles  Turn left onto North Hill Blvd (Located in the Burlington Business Park between KIA and Pacific Coast Auto dealerships)    Turn right Park Lane (second road on right)  Go all the way to the end of Park Lane to PSE Skagit Service Center and parking is to the left of the gate Address is 1660 Park Lane, Burlington, WA 98233   Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009, 9:30 am - 2:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Mark Hunter (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (North Cascades Conservation Council); Sergio Capozzi by phone (EDAW) and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) REMAINING 2009 RRG MEETING DATES  October 20, 2009 at PSE Skagit Service Center in Burlington from 9:30 – 10:30. Feel free to call in since the meeting is only an hour in length. It will be followed by the Law Enforcement Plan (LEP) Meeting (see below).  December 15, 2009 – location to be determined. Note: We will likely meet every other month through 2010, starting the 3rd Tuesday of February. NEXT LEP MEETING October 20 from 11-2:30 at Burlington (following the RRG meeting). NEW ACTION ITEMS  Sergio By September 18 send out summary Water Safety Plan comments including those received by Greta along with corresponding revisions in the plan.  Pam By September 16 send out announcement of October 20 LEP Meeting.  Pam By October 6 send out pre-meeting materials for October 20 LEP Meeting.  Pam Summarize Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan comments and responses to those comments and get them out to all by the October 20 meeting.  Pam Check with Kim about the FS request around RAM funding.  Pam Send out Hazmat and Cultural reports as soon as they become available.  Ann Coordinate burn piles with PSE staff. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 6    Pam  Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E) – (ongoing).  APPROVAL OF JUNE 16, 2009 MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft June Meeting notes with a minor edit. BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that they are considering moving BRCC meetings to a quarterly schedule. PSE has periodically sent out a written update of the activities of each of the resource working groups to all in lieu of the meetings. The next meeting is scheduled to be September 23. At that meeting (at PSE Offices in Bellevue) PSE will host a formal walk-through of the license to assist newcomers (and refresh old timers) in their understanding of the document. Lyn reported that a PSE / USFS Policy Team has met twice to work out how to handle license articles where they have joint responsibilities. They have focused on clarifying roles and responsibilities and clearing up misperceptions of each other’s participation. Attendees were: Kim Lane, Greta Movassaghi, Cary Feldmann, Walt Dortch, Jon Vanderheyden, Rod Mace, Joel Molander, and Ed Schild. Lyn facilitated the meetings. They are considering meeting on a quarterly basis. Kim and Greta are now meeting regularly. We are all grappling with the appropriate level of detail of the management plans and what follows – the implementation plans – reports using the annual reporting tools, etc. The Resort redevelopment plan is high-level and describes the steps that need to be taken to redevelop the resort. The implementation plan will describe in detail how to do this. There may be a 3rd level that includes annual reports to FERC. With the Water Safety Plan, the appropriate level of detail is not yet clear. The high level management plans do not call out the details required for implementation. BAKER RESERVOIR RECREATION WATER SAFETY PLAN Comments on the Water Safety Plan were due September 14. Pam has received comments from JoAnn Gustafson of DNR (correcting her title), Paula Mann of Town of Concrete (no comments), Patrick Goldsworthy of NCCC (questions around sea planes, water skiing, shoreline erosion, boating hazards from submerged tree stumps). Pam suggested that these issues along with such issues as signage might best be included in the more detailed implementation plan. Comments have also been received from Jim Eychaner of the State Recreation and Conservation Office (NCO) – he read the plan and is fine with it. Mark Hunter reported that WDFW will be unable to review the plan due to a staff shortage. Mark will be checking with the regional office. They may delegate their participation to another agency. They have no expertise in their group and no standing familiarity of recreation issues in the area within their group. Pam received comments from Greta (USFS) during the meeting. Greta requested the following changes to the BRRWSP: strike bullets 1-3 as below, which still leaves the highlighted text “agreed upon locations.” 6.3.1 Visitor Water Safety-Related Information and Communication It has been shown that visitor behavior can be positively influenced by providing general information and targeted messages at recreation sites and use areas. As such, the first element of PSE’s water safety-related actions is visitor education and communication. Under this element and per SA 304, the USDA-FS will be responsible for constructing 8 to 12 bulletin boards, while PSE Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 6   will be responsible for developing water safety-related displays and tear-sheet maps that will be placed on these new USDA-FS bulletin boards and other appropriate locations. USDA-FS Bulletin Boards Per License requirements and as described in SA 304, PSE will provide funding to the USDA-FS to construct and install 8 to 12 new bulletin boards. PSE funding for the bulletin boards will be consistent with the funding caps established in the Settlement Agreement (License Appendix A-5). Funding and other article implementation actions will be summarized in PSE’s annual Recreation Management Report (as required by SA 301). While other appropriate visitor information and educational materials may be posted on the USDA-FS bulletin boards, dedicated space will be reserved for water safety-related displays and tear-sheet maps (that will be produced by PSE). Bulletin Board Construction and Installation – Upon receipt of funding from PSE, the USDA-FS will be responsible for constructing and installing the bulletin boards at the agreed-upon locations. Since bulletin boards are semi-permanent, constructed facilities, it is not anticipated that their location will change on an annual basis. However, if a new bulletin board is needed in a new location and/or if an existing bulletin board needs to be moved to a different location, PSE and the USDA-FS will address this change on an as-needed basis during the new License term. Additionally, once constructed and installed, routine maintenance of the bulletin boards will be the responsibility of the site manager (PSE at PSEmanaged recreation sites and use areas, and USDA-FS at USDA-FS-managed recreation sites and use areas). Bulletin board replacement will be assessed periodically throughout the License term and according to the spending caps identified in License Appendix A-5. Greta also says there is no RRG led process for selecting the 8-12 sites where the bulletin boards should be constructed. However, the primary sites are spelled out in the Plan. To clarify; the RRG has no oversight of the FS, that doesn't mean we aren't working in collaboration with the Parties. The process of selecting the locations cannot be formalized in the management plan. Sergio will make those changes to the plan. Periodic maintenance of the boards would be part of the FS responsibility. Next Steps: Sergio will send out a summary of comments received and any resulting changes to the plan by September 18. RESORT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN UPDATE Review Comments Formal comments are due by September 19, 2009. Pam reported receiving back from the following participants: Norma Joseph of Sauk-Suiattle has reviewed the plan. She hasn’t offered any comments. No comments from JoAnn Gustafson (DNR), other than expressing a desire not to be involved in consultation process. Patrick wanted to see a map showing the agreed upon features and locations that must be included. Pam explained this would be part of the implementation piece. Paula and Jim have read the draft and have no comments. Next step: Pam will summarize all comments and responses and get them out to others. The plan is due to FERC by the end of the year.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 6   Status of Cultural Review Pam received an email from Elizabeth Dubreuil stating that no cultural resources were located during survey work. The report should be out this week. We plan for ground disturbing activities September 22. We will need the report by then. Next Steps: Pam will send out the report she received from Elizabeth that clears the way for ground disturbing activities. Decommissioning Plan As per Cary’s Action Item from our June 16 meeting, a meeting occurred the end of June to discuss whether the decommissioning of the resort can / should proceed without FERC’s approval. Attendees were Jon Vanderheyden, Cary Feldmann, Kim Lane, Ed Schild, Pam Garland, and Joel Molander. The resulting agreement was that the decommissioning doesn’t need to be approved by FERC as it is part of what needs to happen in order for the development to occur. It needs to be approved by the USFS. This has been done through the Notice to Proceed. Pam explained that PSE’s operating permit ends this year. They awarded a bid to Catapult Heavy Construction. They are set to participate in a pre-construction meeting September 22. They will be starting with removal of the Gen Shed (Cabin removal, overhead lines, etc.). The FS has elected to keep the store. The rest of the buildings will be taken down. PSE operated the resort until September 7. Since then they have begun removing items from cabins, appliances, generators, propane tanks, etc.). The goal is to have the demo complete within 30-45 days (most likely by the end of this October). At that point the forest would begin redevelopment by the end of the year. The funding to the FS for the redevelopment will occur the end of this year (upon completion of the decommissioning). Hazmat activities should occur before the end of September. All septic tanks were pumped and cleaned last week. Next Steps: The FS will be onsite at the resort September 24 to check status. Pam will send out the hazmat report, cultural report, etc. Ann will map the location of the underground lines in the following three areas: the bath house, the store, and the swim beach. The FS will have some folks out felling trees the last week of the month (must be after September 15). They will coordinate with Pam on this. The hazard (dead) trees were already removed earlier this year. The FS will likely do burn piles and coordinate so as not to interfere with deconstruction. Redevelopment Schedule Ann reported they are working with the engineer starting Sept 24. They will proceed through the winter with design. Other than tree felling and trimming they plan to start construction in spring of 2010. LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN Pam walked us through the notes from the June 16 Law Enforcement Meeting. The meeting was well attended by law enforcement officers from a variety of local jurisdictions. Commonly cited on participants’ wish lists were communications and communication equipment. Note: Pam explained that PSE is looking at installing additional communication tower in the Basin. This would support hydrological readings and also provide communication capability. They will try to place the tower in a location that covers the current dead zones in the basin. Ann explained that the FS is looking at putting up a temporary radio tower in the Dillard’s Ridge area. Limited workforce was also mentioned as a common issue across all jurisdictions. It looks like these meetings will be well attended. Most agencies have indicated that they will be sending at least one representative. The tribes have also been invited and have indicated interest in attending. Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 6   Next Steps: By October 6 Sergio will put together a list of topics to be included in the plan and a description of what would be included in each. Pam will send out an announcement asking LEP Meeting participants to save October 20 along with a draft agenda and a description of the pre-work for the meeting. See below: LEP Meeting Pre-Work:  Review preliminary draft outline of LEP along with high level goals and objectives for the plan  Review suggested framework for management actions  Come with interests from your organizations relative to the LEP Draft October 20, 2009 LEP Meeting Agenda 11:00 – 11:45 Introductions / Review June 16, 2009 LEP Meeting Notes Review License Article 318: Context and Funding 11:45 – 12:15 Participants State Key Interests from their Organizations 12:15 – 1:15 Working Lunch and Agree on Common Vision / Aim for the Plan 1:15 – 2:15 Review Draft Preliminary Outline in Suggested Framework Explain How We Each Contribute to the Vision (see above) 2:15 – 2:30 Identify Next Steps Evaluate the Meeting RAM (Recreation Adaptive Management) FUNDING Ann, on behalf of the FS, requested that the first year of RAM funding be allocated to the shortfall for the Resort construction. Instead of looking at two years in a row, the FS would appreciate access to that first year sooner, in time for the next construction season. They would likely ask for the first two years in time for the construction season. Next Step: This will be in our agenda as a decision for the October 20, 2009 meeting.  RECREATION IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE Pam will define tasks and times for the next two years. We will review this at our December 15 meeting. Next RRG Agenda  BRCC Update  Article 305: Lower Baker Developed Recreation  Recreation Plan Updates o Status of Cultural Review-BLRP SA 303 o Decommissioning Plan Review-BLRP SA 303 o Resort Redevelopment Schedule-BLRP SA 303 o Water Safety Plan, BRRWSP SA 304 o Aesthetics Management Plan, AMP SA 302  Decisions o RAM Funding: Dispense funds for two years now to the Forest Service?  Evaluate Meeting  Set December 15 Meeting Agenda (9:30 – 2:00) Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 5 of 6   Handouts  June 16, 2009 Notes from RRG and Law Enforcement Meetings  September 15, 2009 Agenda  Baker Lake Resort 2009 Decommissioning Schedule  August 25, 2009 Email from Elizabeth Dubreuil  September 15, 2009 Email from Greta Movassaghi Meeting Evaluation Worked Well:  Good location  Welcome Mark!  Good planning for Law Enforcement Plan Meeting  Greta’s comments were extremely timely!  We got through a lot  Hot lunch was appreciated  Got out early Do Differently:  Broader attendance (few attendees)  We will meet again at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington for our next meeting Oct. 20, 2009, with RRG from 9:30 – 10:30 and LEP from 11:00 – 2:00  There was some confusion around decisions to send plans to FERC  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes September 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 6 of 6    2009rrg20090915.pdf en 