 Baker River Project License Implementation Meeting Title: Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Meeting Date: Tuesday, February 24, 2009 Time: 9:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Location: WDFW Office-Mill Creek 16018 Mill Creek Blvd Mill Creek, WA 98012-1541 425-775-1311 AGENDA FOR RRG MEETING February 24, 2009 9:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Note: Estimated times are approximate. 9:30-10:00 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 10:00-10:15 2. FERC/BRCC Status Update-Cary 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting-(None at this time) 10:15-10:30 4. USFWS Consultation Update (Pam)  Review Notes from Consultation meeting on Feb 5, 2009  New alternative designs  Next Steps 10:30- 10:40 5. Break 10:40-11:00 6. RRG Norms review 11:00-11:30 7. RRG Decision Discussion (Pam)  What constitutes a decision-Cary?  Are there any decisions this group has made prior to license issuance that need to be codified now that we have a license? 11:30-12:00 8. Lunch to be provided-Discuss possible date change for March meeting following the resort site visit on March 18. 12:00-12:30 9. Loon Presentation (Anna Kopitov) 12:30- 1:00 10. Update on Recreation Plan Development and schedule 1:00-1:15 11. Cross-Resource Opportunities 1:15-1:30 12. Kim Lane-Comments 1:30-2:00 13. Evaluate Meeting/Set Agenda NEW ACTION ITEMS  Pam Send out 2009 RRG meeting schedule with meeting notes  Haley Draft consultation/accommodation notes for submission w/concurrence plan (use Dave’s example format)  Dave Send Haley (cc: Cary, Pam) an example of consultation notes for reviewed docs  Pam Email Lou Ellyn (USFWS) the draft Proposal for Concurrence to request an initial, informal review and feedback  Dave Coordinate resort site visit w/Lou Ellyn and Haley  Dave Book the Mill Creek room for Feb (hold for March), April, and June Mtgs. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E) CONFERENCE CALL INFORMATION: Dial in from your phone: Meeting Place Main Number 425-456-2500 Internal Number 81-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 3691215 Password: 12345 Driving Instructions: To drive to the Mill Creek office: from I-5, take Exit 183 onto 164th Street Southeast. Continue eastbound about 1.5 miles. At the bottom of the hill, turn left onto Mill Creek Boulevard. Look for us on the left about 1 ½ blocks north directly across from Bank of America. Parking is available. The WDFW Mill Creek office general phone number is 425 775 1311. Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 24, 2009, 9:30 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Office, 16018 Mill Creek Blvd., Mill Creek FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if plans to attend the meeting change) Note: To verify whether a meeting will occur during inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstance, call Pam Garland the morning of the meeting at home: 360-826-3087 or cell: 360-661-2243. PRESENT Pam Garland, Anna Kopitov, Haley Edwards, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Paula Mann (Town of Concrete); David Geroux (WDFW); JoAnn Gustafson (DNR); Sergio Capozzi by phone (EDAW Consulting); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT RRG MEETING DATES March 18, 2009, Resort Site Visit (follow-up to USFWS consult), followed by presentation to CRAG April 2009, Pam will coordinate a meeting if needed (Mill Creek is reserved for April 21), or will schedule a conference call (perhaps after April 2 TRIG meeting), and will notify members accordingly June and August 2009 meetings are scheduled to be held in Burlington. NEW ACTION ITEMS  All Consider RRG activities to date, notify Pam if you think of any pre-license decisions  Dave Coordinate w/ Rich Johnson to identify WDFW reps to BRCC & RRG  Dave Work w/ WDFW I.T. folks to give Sergio access to water safety sign templates/content  Jamie Incorporate edits into RRG norms, send to Pam to distribute w/ these notes  Pam Coordinate March meeting w/ CRAG; ask Elizabeth if CRAG could meet at the Baker Lodge so RRG could present the redevelopment plan after the 3/18 Resort site visit  Pam Connect w/ Stan re: Tribal representation for plan approval (need quorum)  Pam Connect w/ Lyn to ID potential dates to meet w/ agencies re: Law Enforcement Plan PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Haley Draft consultation notes for submission w/ concurrence plan (use Dave’s example)  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E) Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, February 24, 2009 Page 1 of 4 BRCC / LICENSE UPDATES Cary reported that the BRCC met January 28 by conference call. This meeting officially chartered the BRCC and its resource groups - ARG, CRAG, TRIG, and RRG (as described in the license). He also shared a recap of a recent FERC / PSE meeting to coordinate the transition from licensing to compliance. Paul W. (PSE) presented information to FERC about the project overview, license articles, early- implementation activities, the 2009 plan for the hatchery and adult fish trap, the longer-term schedules for the powerhouse and lower baker FSC, the connection between licensing activities and dam safety, and PSE’s compliance program. At that meeting, FERC indicated a sense of confidence in PSE’s ability to implement the license, and PSE came away with an action item to propose a way to clarify the articles with overlapping naming / numbering issues in the license (articles 305/306). Cary shared that the need for agencies to formally identify their representatives to the BRCC and resource groups was discussed at the last BRCC meeting, and the responses are coming in now. Dave noted that state budget issues will likely result in a new position for him and a new WDFW representative to the BRCC and RRG. Pam and Cary talked about cross-resource articles and opportunities/needs for collaboration. They asked RRG members who participate in multiple resource groups to be on the lookout for such issues. USFWS Consultation Update: PSE, USFS, WDFW, and USFWS held a consultation meeting after the 2/5 TRIG meeting as discussed at the Dec. 2008 RRG meeting. The notes of that meeting are pasted in here for RRG reference: Pam Garland introduced Ann Dunphy (USFS) and Jamie Van De Vanter (Van De Vanter Landscape Architects) to walk the group through the redevelopment planning to date. The original resort went underwater when the dam was built and the lake created. Some of the buildings were salvaged and moved to their current location at that time. The settlement agreement called for turning the resort over to the USFS, and the redevelopment is intended to make the facility align with USFS operations. The current draft plans address several issues; highlights include:  Clarifies of vehicle circulation through the grounds (reducing the looping required to find a particular site)  Increased day use options  Separation of day use areas from camping areas  Reduced density / sites (current density is at commercial resort levels)  Minimized impact on sensitive areas  Elimination of cabins to create true campground  Adds power / water spigots rather than separate RV hookups  Maintains the store, which has historical value, provides a communication hub, and could be used for I/E purposes  Clarifies parking (increases vehicle control to limit vehicle impact to the grounds)  Improves signage  Provides appropriate turning radiuses for large vehicles Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, February 24, 2009 Page 2 of 5 Agency Consult Comments:  Surveys were required by the Bi-Op since plans for the resort were not developed enough for the USFWS to make a determination at that that time. If the area was assumed to be occupied habitat, the survey requirement could be waived.  The whole Resort area is considered suitable, and assumed to be occupied, habitat.  In the May site visit the plans involved removal of 2-3 conifers. Now, with new tree surveys and identification of hazard trees, more trees will be removed. There are 33 conifers being removed for construction with a dbh (diameter at breast height) of >12” and nine conifers to be removed for aesthetics with a dbh of >12”. Problem with this- the buffer area will be opened up, making the area of potential habitat more vulnerable to wind throw and predation.  Along the shoreline- pruning okay.  Hazard tree removal- many hazard trees are dead already and pose safety risks in the campground; some hazard trees may also be potential nest trees.  Three issues: 1. Construction removal due to redevelopment, and 2. Hazard tree removal for safety reasons (not part of redevelopment, would happen anyway), 3. Trees removed due to aesthetic reasons. Next Steps:  Lou Ellyn – take plans back to Deanna and review (done)  Jamie V. – re-work the design of the turn-around to try to eliminate the removal of the large tree (done)  Ann – email the Hazard Tree Criteria used to identify the hazard trees at the resort to Lou Ellyn (done)  Haley – plan a site visit for WFDW and USFWS (scheduled for 3/18) (done) RRG Norms: We reviewed the draft norms and edited them together. Jamie R. will incorporate edits and send the updated norms to Pam to distribute with these notes. RRG Decisions to Date: Cary explained that pre-license issuance decisions need to be codified now that the RRG is officially chartered. He also talked about the level of 'decision' that meets the criteria for needing to be recognized. Generally, plan development and word-smithing do not need to be codified because the official decision point will come with the formal review process and approval for submission to FERC. Decisions which involved the expenditure of money (other than those expenditures that were specifically prescribed in the Settlement Agreement / License) and any other decisions that could be appealed would be the types of decisions that would need to be codified. After some discussion, the group did not identify any decisions the RRG made pre-license that need codification. All expenditures were already spelled out in the SA, and no plans have been through the formal review and submittal process yet. Cary and Pam asked the group to continue thinking about this, and to alert Pam if anyone thinks of a decision that requires official approval / codification of the RRG. RRG Upcoming Meetings: Resort and Water Safety Plans have upcoming deadlines. The Water Safety Plan needs to be submitted for Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, February 24, 2009 Page 3 of 5 30-day review by March 30 (email is OK), and USFS would need the Resort Redevelopment Plan and funding to be available by the end of April in order to complete the construction package by Fall 2009. If the plan isn't approved by then, USFS would need to re-evaluate and then proceed as conditions allow. Pam will work with Elizabeth (CRAG team lead) to see if RRG can present the Resort Redevelopment Plan to the CRAG at their next meeting, which is scheduled for March 18. She will also ask if they would be willing to move their meeting to the Baker Lodge so RRG members could conduct this meeting directly following the Resort site visit (already scheduled for 3/18 a.m.). Pam will look at upcoming action items / deadlines and the results of the site visit and CRAG presentation to determine whether an April meeting will be needed. The Mill Creek room is available and held for RRG if needed (April 21). The June and August RRG meetings are currently scheduled in Burlington. Re: the Law Enforcement Plan, Pam will coordinate w/ Lyn to identify potential dates to meet with agencies - preferably before summer recreation season. Water Safety Management Plan (Article 304): Sergio Capozzi (EDAW Consulting) called in to seek input into the draft Water Safety Plan, which will be distributed for review by March 30. He started by walking the group through provisions in the article:  Funding to USFS to construct and install 8-12 bulletin boards  PSE to provide displays / tear-sheet maps  PSE to delineate swim areas at Resort area The group discussed how to effectively communicate water safety information to the recreating public. Sergio noted that the plan calls for the locations and content. Anne's understanding is that PSE will generate content and Cary shared that FERC may have content guidelines based on their work at other projects. Dave offered to share WDFW's templates / content. At the management plan level, we just need to identify the major categories of information (Cary's sandbox vs. rules of each game analogy). The details will be developed in the procedures and implementation document. Re: Bulletin board locations, PSE's responsibilities are defined in the license. Loon Platforms (Article 507): Anna walked the group through a description of the article and activities to date. The license calls for three floating nest platforms, with restriction zones to limit public access and disturbance. Also must survey / monitor to determine loon activity on/near the platforms and the effectiveness of the restriction zones. Platforms and restriction zones must be in place April 1 - July 31; this will be reviewed in the 16th year of the license. There are coordinations with Article 304-Water Safety, Article 307-IE, and 318-Law Enforcement. The first platform was designed and installed on Lake Shannon in 2007 as a pre-license issuance practice / pilot program. No loon use was observed; the team is modifying the design for the next two platforms, which are scheduled to be installed on Baker Lake this year. Anna also shared the draft signage. Anne noted that 24"x26" (vertical orientation) is the standard size for USFS bulletin board signage. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, February 24, 2009 Page 4 of 5 Next Agenda:  Review the Master Implementation Schedule and the Master Reporting Schedule (Cary)  Review updated Proposal for Concurrence (Pam, Ann) o Review comments from second site visit (Haley, David) o If available: Review draft design narrative and vegetation management plan (Ann) o If available: Review draft of consultation / accommodation notes (Haley)  Review Recreation Plan Development timeline Handouts:  December 16 Notes and February 24 Agenda  Draft Implementation Schedule  Draft RRG Norms Meeting Evaluation Worked Well:  Good conversations  Loon presentation  9:30 start time (on time!) Do Differently:  Light agenda today Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, February 24, 2009 Page 5 of 5  