BAKER RIVER PROJECT LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting March 5th, 2009 (9:00 p.m. – 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting  AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from February 5th, 2009 meeting. 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities and New License review/issues.  License/BRCC update  Review decision / agreement / milestones list  Review TRIG Norms/TRIG budget – Tony and Cary 3. Decisions Required at Today’s Meeting: Yes 1. Decision Item #1: Does the TRIG adopt the SA Article 509 Plants of Special Status Plan with comments and responses? 2. Decision Item #2: Does the TRIG adopt the SA Article 510 Carex flava Plan with comments and responses? 3. Decision Item #3: Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today’s meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision)  Please Designate Proxy to express your view if you cannot attend. 4. Land Acquisition Update  Property Y Update, Alternate properties list – Ira and Tony  Reed Canary Grass management – Tony, Dave  Routine Cost of Land Ownership, review draft language – Cary and Marty  Draft proposal for multi-article properties update - Anna, Cary 5. TRMP plans update  Review TRMP (Article 501) and updated TRMP implementation schedule - Marty  Status of Legacy Wood plan, bald eagle night roost survey field trip report – Haley 6. Loon Update  Progress and Photos - Anna 8. Evaluate meeting, set location (FWS Lacy?) and agenda for next meeting (April 2nd, 2009)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes March 5, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Ira McDaniels, Anna Kopitov, Haley Edwards, Kim Lane, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 509 Plants of Special Status Plan with comments and responses?  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 510 Carex flava Plan with comments and responses? The TRIG agreed that a quorum was present, and the following proxy was noted: Dave Geroux represented Lou Ellyn Jones. Both the 509 and 510 plans were adopted by consensus of all present.   The third decision item in the published agenda: "Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today's meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision)" was tabled for future consideration.  ACTION ITEMS  Tony Once the BRCC has clarified the escalation formula, bring an updated accounting of TRIG funds (in “today’s dollars,” less any expenditures to date) to the next mtg.  Jamie Email edited Norms to Tony to distribute with these notes  Tony Research "good faith" language re: pre-license acquisition efforts for decision list  Tony Distribute Norms and draft proposal re: multi-article properties with today's notes  Tony Work w/ Cary and Marty to develop a draft written proposal regarding the assets and liabilities on acquired lands ... roll in Marty's draft language on costs of land ownership ... and email to TRIG for review before the next meeting (cc: Rich Johnson, WDFW)  Ira Send Dave a map or parcel #s for the possible "new alternate" property  Tony Follow up re: FERC's thoughts on the possible "new alternate" property  Dave Vet the possible "new alternate" property within WDFW  All Review the draft language re: multi-article properties and cost/liabilities of land ownership, send comments to Tony PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Kim Work on simplified budget report sheet  Anna Email updated Habitat Matrix to TRIG  Marty Update pre-acquisition checklist to include estimated land ownership costs TRIG Budget Sheet Update: PSE continues to work on developing a simplified budget report for TRIG and other resource groups. Stay tuned ...   Elk Sightings: FYI - The Hurn’s Field elk are currently on a nearby field between the highway and river, off of Wilde road. TRIG MEETING SCHEDULE TRIG is in the midst of plan development: TRIG is scheduled to approve the Carex flava and Plants of Special Status plans today (must go to FERC by the end of March); Legacy Wood and the TRMP will be out by the end of the month; and there are seven more that must go out for FERC approval by the end of September. TRIG is currently scheduled to meet monthly, but agency budget cuts are affecting an increasing number of team members. The group talked about the most efficient way to conduct the plan reviews (regular meetings, email, teamlets, multi-day workshop). The interest is to minimize meetings while maintaining the opportunity for input. The group agreed to rely more on email and to change the TRIG meetings to every other month. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE The BRCC cancelled its last meeting due to a light agenda. The next meeting is scheduled for 3/25, and Jacob (PSE) has scheduled an Article 505 Aquatic Riparian Habitat Teamlet to follow the BRCC. REVIEW / DISCUSSION OF DRAFT "INTERIM DECISION LIST" We reviewed the draft decision list Tony generated and distributed. Dave asked about the "good faith" language relative to the team's work towards pre-license land acquisition. Tony will research and add it to the list. The group also reviewed the concept of timber values / revenues and other potential assets and liabilities associated with acquired lands. There were different interpretations within the group regarding the August 7, 2008 agreement language: Did it address all future revenues, or did it specifically apply to assets on-site at the time of an acquisition? The group agreed that the goal of land acquisition is elk forage, not profit / proceeds. Tony, Cary, and Marty will draft a written proposal about this for the group to review. Based on this discussion, the third decision on the agenda: "Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today's meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision)" was tabled for future consideration. Proxies: Dave Geroux represents Lou Ellyn Jones DECISIONS - Plants of Special Status & Carex flava Plans  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 509 Plants of Special Status Plan with comments and responses?  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 510 Carex flava Plan with comments and responses? Anna noted that grammatical errors and other typos have been corrected and section 5.5 was removed at the request of the Upper Skagit Tribe. Cary commented that section 5.5 was redundant since the relevant information is addressed in Article 601. Both Plans were adopted by consensus of all present. PSE will submit both plans to FERC, and the group will move forward with the plans unless FERC says otherwise. PROPERTY ACQUISITION Ira shared an update on Property Y (ask him or Tony for details). He and Ray have been on-site looking at another property, and Ira shared information about this property as well. The group noticed that it has explored nearly all the available property in its Tier One area. Chris Danilson mentioned a potential parcel that is outside the core area; WDFW has indicated initial comfort with this parcel. Ira will review it further, Dave will vet the property internally (WDFW), and TRIG will discuss at its next meeting. MULTI-ARTICLE PROPERTIES  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final Notes, Page 2 of 3   PSE presented an initial draft to describe an approach to properties that meet the requirements of multiple license articles. Tony noted that this is a process description; it does not in any way change or impact the Settlement Agreement. Tony will attach the draft to these notes and invited input from all. TRMP Marty distributed the current draft of the TRMP in outline form and walked us through a high level review. Thanks to all the work completed over the last few years, a filled in version of this TRMP will be available for review by the end of the month. It will not include the individual plans (Articles 502, 503, etc); these will be inserted into their chapter placeholders once FERC approves them. TRIG will review comments at its next meeting. Looking ahead at the separate plans, Noxious Weeds is nearly ready to go, and Legacy Wood requires a 90-day review, so it must start its formal review by June 1st, which means that the informal review will start by May 1st. The rest, since they require a 30-day formal review, must be out for their review by August 1 (meaning the informal review must start by July 1). We want to avoid overload, so Tony and Marty will develop a schedule to spread out these seven review periods. LEGACY WOOD PLAN Marty walked the group through a review of the "Legacy Wood Plan Overview." Haley and Marty have been reviewing literature about snag development requirements to imitate an unmanaged forest. The group provided high-level feedback; Haley and Marty will continue to work on this. EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY FIELD TRIP Haley shared information about the site-visit; the group went out on Lake Shannon by boat to identify good potential survey sites. They found several possibilities with attractive stands of trees, and Haley projected a map marked with the three best sites. LOON NESTING PLATFORM UPDATE Anna reported that PSE is on track to install the loon nesting platforms on Baker Lake by March 31 - as long as the lake thaws by then. If ice prevents a late-March install of one or both of the platforms, the TRIG directed PSE to install the platform when it becomes possible to do so. May 7 Agenda:  TRMP & Other Plans  Updated Plan Review Schedule (showing staggered review times for the final seven) o Land Acquisition Update, including property Y, potential "new alternative" property  Decisions list - review draft language  Budget Report  Loon Report Handouts:  2/5/09 Notes & 3/5/09 Agenda  Baker River Legacy Wood Plan, Draft 5 March 2009  Baker River TRIG Decisions/agreements/understandings draft list, 2/25/09  5 March 2009 Draft proposal for pooling funding resources  5 March 2009 DRAFT TRMP MEETING EVALUATION What worked well:  Appreciate Bill's insights  Nice handouts, Marty Do differently:  Going to miss Dave BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final Notes, Page 3 of 3   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes March 5, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Ira McDaniels, Anna Kopitov, Haley Edwards, Kim Lane, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Chris Danilson (Sauk-Suiattle); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 509 Plants of Special Status Plan with comments and responses?  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 510 Carex flava Plan with comments and responses? The TRIG agreed that a quorum was present, and the following proxy was noted: Dave Geroux represented Lou Ellyn Jones. Both the 509 and 510 plans were adopted by consensus of all present.   The third decision item in the published agenda: "Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today's meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision)" was tabled for future consideration.  ACTION ITEMS  Tony Once the BRCC has clarified the escalation formula, bring an updated accounting of TRIG funds (in “today’s dollars,” less any expenditures to date) to the next mtg.  Jamie Email edited Norms to Tony to distribute with these notes  Tony Research "good faith" language re: pre-license acquisition efforts for decision list  Tony Distribute Norms and draft proposal re: multi-article properties with today's notes  Tony Work w/ Cary and Marty to develop a draft written proposal regarding the assets and liabilities on acquired lands ... roll in Marty's draft language on costs of land ownership ... and email to TRIG for review before the next meeting (cc: Rich Johnson, WDFW)  Ira Send Dave a map or parcel #s for the possible "new alternate" property  Tony Follow up re: FERC's thoughts on the possible "new alternate" property  Dave Vet the possible "new alternate" property within WDFW  All Review the draft language re: multi-article properties and cost/liabilities of land ownership, send comments to Tony PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS  Kim Work on simplified budget report sheet  Anna Email updated Habitat Matrix to TRIG  Marty Update pre-acquisition checklist to include estimated land ownership costs TRIG Budget Sheet Update: PSE continues to work on developing a simplified budget report for TRIG and other resource groups. Stay tuned ...   Elk Sightings: FYI - The Hurn’s Field elk are currently on a nearby field between the highway and river, off of Wilde road. TRIG MEETING SCHEDULE TRIG is in the midst of plan development: TRIG is scheduled to approve the Carex flava and Plants of Special Status plans today (must go to FERC by the end of March); Legacy Wood and the TRMP will be out by the end of the month; and there are seven more that must go out for FERC approval by the end of September. TRIG is currently scheduled to meet monthly, but agency budget cuts are affecting an increasing number of team members. The group talked about the most efficient way to conduct the plan reviews (regular meetings, email, teamlets, multi-day workshop). The interest is to minimize meetings while maintaining the opportunity for input. The group agreed to rely more on email and to change the TRIG meetings to every other month. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE The BRCC cancelled its last meeting due to a light agenda. The next meeting is scheduled for 3/25, and Jacob (PSE) has scheduled an Article 505 Aquatic Riparian Habitat Teamlet to follow the BRCC. REVIEW / DISCUSSION OF DRAFT "INTERIM DECISION LIST" We reviewed the draft decision list Tony generated and distributed. Dave asked about the "good faith" language relative to the team's work towards pre-license land acquisition. Tony will research and add it to the list. The group also reviewed the concept of timber values / revenues and other potential assets and liabilities associated with acquired lands. There were different interpretations within the group regarding the August 7, 2008 agreement language: Did it address all future revenues, or did it specifically apply to assets on-site at the time of an acquisition? The group agreed that the goal of land acquisition is elk forage, not profit / proceeds. Tony, Cary, and Marty will draft a written proposal about this for the group to review. Based on this discussion, the third decision on the agenda: "Does the TRIG formally adopt certain decisions made in previous interim meetings, specifically those discussed at today's meeting? (Agree to list prior to decision)" was tabled for future consideration. Proxies: Dave Geroux represents Lou Ellyn Jones DECISIONS - Plants of Special Status & Carex flava Plans  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 509 Plants of Special Status Plan with comments and responses?  Does the TRIG adopt the Settlement Agreement Article 510 Carex flava Plan with comments and responses? Anna noted that grammatical errors and other typos have been corrected and section 5.5 was removed at the request of the Upper Skagit Tribe. Cary commented that section 5.5 was redundant since the relevant information is addressed in Article 601. Both Plans were adopted by consensus of all present. PSE will submit both plans to FERC, and the group will move forward with the plans unless FERC says otherwise. PROPERTY ACQUISITION Ira shared an update on Property Y (ask him or Tony for details). He and Ray have been on-site looking at another property, and Ira shared information about this property as well. The group noticed that it has explored nearly all the available property in its Tier One area. Chris Danilson mentioned a potential parcel that is outside the core area; WDFW has indicated initial comfort with this parcel. Ira will review it further, Dave will vet the property internally (WDFW), and TRIG will discuss at its next meeting. MULTI-ARTICLE PROPERTIES  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final Notes, Page 2 of 3   PSE presented an initial draft to describe an approach to properties that meet the requirements of multiple license articles. Tony noted that this is a process description; it does not in any way change or impact the Settlement Agreement. Tony will attach the draft to these notes and invited input from all. TRMP Marty distributed the current draft of the TRMP in outline form and walked us through a high level review. Thanks to all the work completed over the last few years, a filled in version of this TRMP will be available for review by the end of the month. It will not include the individual plans (Articles 502, 503, etc); these will be inserted into their chapter placeholders once FERC approves them. TRIG will review comments at its next meeting. Looking ahead at the separate plans, Noxious Weeds is nearly ready to go, and Legacy Wood requires a 90-day review, so it must start its formal review by June 1st, which means that the informal review will start by May 1st. The rest, since they require a 30-day formal review, must be out for their review by August 1 (meaning the informal review must start by July 1). We want to avoid overload, so Tony and Marty will develop a schedule to spread out these seven review periods. LEGACY WOOD PLAN Marty walked the group through a review of the "Legacy Wood Plan Overview." Haley and Marty have been reviewing literature about snag development requirements to imitate an unmanaged forest. The group provided high-level feedback; Haley and Marty will continue to work on this. EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEY FIELD TRIP Haley shared information about the site-visit; the group went out on Lake Shannon by boat to identify good potential survey sites. They found several possibilities with attractive stands of trees, and Haley projected a map marked with the three best sites. LOON NESTING PLATFORM UPDATE Anna reported that PSE is on track to install the loon nesting platforms on Baker Lake by March 31 - as long as the lake thaws by then. If ice prevents a late-March install of one or both of the platforms, the TRIG directed PSE to install the platform when it becomes possible to do so. May 7 Agenda:  TRMP & Other Plans  Updated Plan Review Schedule (showing staggered review times for the final seven) o Land Acquisition Update, including property Y, potential "new alternative" property  Decisions list - review draft language  Budget Report  Loon Report Handouts:  2/5/09 Notes & 3/5/09 Agenda  Baker River Legacy Wood Plan, Draft 5 March 2009  Baker River TRIG Decisions/agreements/understandings draft list, 2/25/09  5 March 2009 Draft proposal for pooling funding resources  5 March 2009 DRAFT TRMP MEETING EVALUATION What worked well:  Appreciate Bill's insights  Nice handouts, Marty Do differently:  Going to miss Dave BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final Notes, Page 3 of 3    2009trig20090305.pdf en 