BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Wednesday, October 28th, 2009 (9:00 am to 12:00 pm) PSE Building Madrona Conference Room 8th Floor 10885 NE 4th Street Bellevue, Washington 98004-5591 Scott Heller's cell phone: (206) 437-6042 Conference Call Line: 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 8500 Password: 4567 AGENDA 1. Welcome, introductions, review notes, agenda (15 minutes) 2. License updates (15 minutes) 3. Carex Working Group Baseline Study 2009 (Carex flava) (15 minutes) 4. Platanthera orbiculata and other PSS site specific management decisions (30 minutes) 5. 2010 Implementation Discussion- Phalaris arundinacea control/WB-17 And other noxious weed control (1 hour) 6. Discuss native plant propagation/revegetation standards (30 minutes) 7. Evaluate meeting, set date, and agenda for next meeting. (15 minutes) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150   BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE  Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Wednesday, October 28th, 2009 (9:00 am to 12:00 pm) PSE Building Madrona Conference Room 8th Floor 10885 NE 4th Street Bellevue, Washington 98004-5591  FINAL MEETING NOTES  Team Leader: Scott Heller (PSE) 425-457-5578, 206-437-6042 (cell), scott.heller@pse.com Meeting attendees: Laura Potash Martin (USFS), Ann Risvold (USFS), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Brock Applegate (WDFW), Tony Fuchs (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental)  1. Welcome, introductions, review notes, agenda 2. License updates 3. Carex Working Group Baseline Study 2009 (Carex flava) 4. Platanthera orbiculata and other PSS site specific management decisions 5. 2010 Implementation Discussion- Phalaris arundinacea control/WB-17 And other noxious weed control 6. Discuss native plant propagation/revegetation standards 7. Evaluate meeting, set date, and agenda for next meeting  New Action Items: Tony will contact Pam Garland (PSE) to determine whether Rec Site BW12 (Lower Sandy Creek) was selected for improvements under Article 308, Dispersed Recreation Management Plan Funding. If the site has not been selected for improvements, the Botanical Teamlet will coordinate with Ann Dunphy (USFS) and Pam Garland to discuss possible management actions that are desired for protection of Platanthera orbiculata. Scott will distribute the Draft Final Carex flava Baseline Study Report for 30-day review by Botanical Teamlet members, on or about October 30, 2009. Scott and Kathy will revisit the Peltigera pacifica site near Chadwick Creek to determine whether the population is present and to make note of current human use of the site. Ann Risvold will be notified of the field trip date. After the site visit, a brief summary will be provided to Ann and  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 October 28, 2009 Botanical Teamlet  1   Laura; if Peltigera presence is confirmed, they will discuss site protection with law enforcement officer Jeremy Smith. Tony will continue to follow up on determining the process for funding, escalating funds, and accounting for articles with specified funding limits and schedules. Laura and Ann will provide PSE contact information for weed management contractors that they have used and/or would recommend for work in the Baker basin. Kathy will provide the Botanical Teamlet one or more pdf files of the current draft of the noxious weed implementation plan and all of its attachments. Tony will investigate whether a Terrestrial folder can be established on PSE's ftp site for future use in exchanging large documents. Laura and/or Ann will contact Ann Dunphy and other FS staff to determine the status of revegetation planning for the Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan; Ann will be invited to attend a Botanical Teamlet meeting on November 12 or 16, 2009, 9am-3pm, at the Burlington PSE office. Scott will request a copy of the current Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan from Pam Garland. Pam will be invited to attend a Botanical Teamlet meeting on November 12 or 16, 2009, 9am-3pm, at the Burlington PSE office. Report on Old Action Items: Not reported during meeting. All new items from the last meeting, November 17, 2008, have been completed. Ongoing Action Items: Not reported during meeting. Summary below has been updated from the November 17, 2008 list:  Scott and/or Tony will investigate opportunities for low elevation orthophotography of the Carex flava site at Baker Lake.  Resurvey of designated portions of the Noxious Weed Plan area will be conducted on a 5-year schedule (this decision has been incorporated into the Noxious Weed Plan).  Scott and Kathy will prepare photos and GIS maps of mapped habitat polygons for the seven reed canarygrass wetlands for use in discussion of canarygrass control concepts. These materials will be available for the Botanical Teamlet meeting targeting noxious weeds, tentatively planned for December 2009 or January 2010.  The T2 database and map of selected polygons was forwarded to Laura Martin on January 15, 2009. License Update: Scott reported that the three plans addressing the botanical Settlement/License articles have been submitted to FERC. These include the following:  Carex flava Plan, Article 510, March 27, 2009 Plants of Special Status Plan, Article 509, March 27, 2009 Noxious Weed Plan, Article 508, September 30, 2009  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 October 28, 2009 Botanical Teamlet  2   Scott will be the PSE lead for these three articles and will serve as co-lead with Tony on Article 504, Wetlands. No response has been received from FERC on any of the plans; it is not unusual for this to take a year or more. PSE plans to proceed with implementation without waiting for FERC's direction.  The next tasks for the Botanical Teamlet are the completion of the three implementation plans that will serve as the detailed plans for implementing management actions.  Plants of Special Status. The draft implementation plan for plants of special status, and associated species-specific management plans, were reviewed by the Botanical Teamlet in fall 2008. The management plan for the Platanthera orbiculata site at Lower Sandy Creek has not been completed. This site is also known as dispersed recreation site BW12; its status in the Article 308 recreation site improvements needs to be determined. It was decided that the FS and PSE will discuss the Lower Sandy site with their respective recreation counterparts to determine the next steps in development of protective measures.  It was also decided that the management plan for the Peltigera pacifica site at Chadwick Creek should be revisited. Ann reported that she had visited the Peltigera site in 2008; logs had been placed near the toe of slope, possibly to prevent motorized access along the slope. She noted that the slope has been used as a backdrop for target practice. Scott and Kathy will revisit the site to try to confirm species presence and will report to Laura and Ann. Forest Service law enforcement may be contacted to discuss possible actions to protect the plant at the site.  Carex flava. The Carex Working Group conducted the baseline census between August 6 and 10, 2009. Scott participated in the field work on August 7. The Draft Final Report is expected by the end of October, and will be circulated to the Botanical Teamlet members for an approximately 30-d review period. The intent is to have the Final Report completed by the end of the year.  The 2009 baseline study resulted in a census of 362 plants, vs. 525 counted in 2006. All of the 2006 transects were relocated; an additional transect was added to include ten new plants that were observed. The CWG is now recording lifestage of each plant; otherwise, the identification and enumeration methods remain as developed in 2006. Sub-meter accuracy GPS was used to locate end points of transects and to track the outer boundary of reed canarygrass; all GPS data are recorded in PSE's standard coordinate system.  During winter/spring 2007, a large rain event caused significant stream erosion at the site, as well as very high reservoir levels. Many of the 2006 plants were washed out; this is reflected in the reduced numbers of plants observed along Transect 2 which parallels the stream. Reduced numbers of plants were also recorded along Transect 5, which extends upslope into an area heavily shaded by alder. A large amount of Carex lenticularis is present at the site, in many locations in close proximity to C. flava. A large proportion of the study area is now covered with large woody debris as a result of the 2007 high water elevation.  The next steps for completion of the Carex flava implementation plan include the following: BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 October 28, 2009 Botanical Teamlet  3   The Botanical Teamlet will review the CWG 2009 Baseline Study Report (expected to be available in late October)  PSE will update the draft implementation plan to reflect the 2009 census results and any changes in methodology.  PSE will distribute the draft implementation plan to the Botanical Teamlet and will hold a meeting of the teamlet to discuss ways to address the other questions posed in Article 510 (as summarized on page 9 of Carex flava Plan). Noxious Weeds. The draft implementation plan for noxious weeds, and associated species-specific management plans and the prioritization process, were reviewed by the Botanical Teamlet in fall 2008. Kathy will prepare one or more pdf's of these files and distribute to the teamlet. The primary task remaining to be completed on this plan is the site-specific management plan for the seven reed canarygrass wetlands: WB-17, 20, 21, 25, 28, 29, and 30. Scott provided maps of the general locations of these wetlands at Baker Lake, as well as orthophotographs of most of the sites. It was decided that completion of this task is relatively urgent, in order to take full advantage of available reed canarygrass management funding next season; it was assigned second priority behind plant propagation methods (described below). A meeting will be scheduled for December 2009 or January 2010; the teamlet will identify potential dates during the November meeting. It was noted that wetland WB-17 may be considered for experimental treatments of reed canarygrass to test methods that may be suitable for use at the Carex flava site. These treatments will be funded by the Carex flava article, and will be conducted and budgeted separately from treatments designed solely to reduce reed canarygrass within WB-17. Treatments not related to the Carex flava site will be funded by the seven reed canarygrass wetlands funding portion of the Noxious Weed Plan. Scott and Kathy will compile information on reed canarygrass management methods that may be suitable for these sites, and additional photos and materials, prior to the noxious weed meeting of the Botanical Teamlet. Plant Propagation. The plant propagation task is not a License or Settlement Agreement Article, but is necessary to fulfill requirements of the Forest Service Native Plant policy. In the past, it was agreed that the Forest Service would investigate and take on the cost of seed collection and increase for herbaceous species and PSE would do the same for shrubs and trees. The Forest Service has initiated work on herbaceous species with seed collection of Geum macrophyllum and Tolmiea menziesii in summer 2009. It was decided that one of the primary pieces of information necessary is the number and location of projects that will be requiring revegetation, as well as the area and types of habitats to be revegetated, in the upcoming years. Projects that may require plant materials in 2010 include the seven reed canargygrass wetlands, the hatchery renovation site, the road project near Upper Baker Dam, Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment, the spawning beaches, the shoreline erosion plan, and other recreation sites. Action items were assigned to the FS and PSE to follow up on the Resort Redevelopment and other potential projects. Due to the need for advance planning to prepare plant materials, this topic will be the subject of the next Botanical Teamlet meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 October 28, 2009 Botanical Teamlet  4   Next Meeting. A Botanical Teamlet meeting will be scheduled for November 12 or 16, 2009, from 9am3pm at the PSE Burlington office (tentatively). PSE and FS recreation specialists will be invited to participate in discussion of ground-disturbing projects and FS requirements for revegetation plans. The agenda also will include discussion of other aspects of the plant propagation program, and selection of a date for a Botanical Teamlet meeting in December or January on the topic of noxious weed management.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 October 28, 2009 Botanical Teamlet  5    2009trig20091028_bot.pdf en 