BAKER RIVER PROJECT LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Technical Meeting January 8th, 2009 (9:00 p.m. <ad> 2:00 p.m.) WDFW Mill Creek Office 16018 Mill Creek Boulevard Mill Creek, Washington 98012-1296 Telephone (425) 775-1311 Conference Call Line: 1-888-228-0484, ID: 2821, Password: 4567 Please tell Tony (425-462-3553 (w) or 206-276-1204 (m)) if you plan to call into meeting AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from December 4th, 2008 meeting. 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities and New License review/issues. License update Review TRIG Budget, process <ad> Paul, Tony 3. Decisions Required at Today's Meeting: None 1. Decision Item #1: None 4. Land Acquisition Update Property Y Update <ad> Ira and Tony Review cost estimates for Reed Canary Grass management - Tony Alternate properties list/data base /status <ad> Ira, Ray, Tony Review habitat matrix - Anna Draft proposal for multi-article properties update - Anna, Cary 5. Botanical Teamlet update Carex flava & Plants of Special Status Plans - Anna and Kathy 6. TRMP plans update Status of Legacy Wood plan - Haley 7. Loon Update Progress - Anna 8. Eagle Teamlet Meeting <ad> last hour? Determine survey locations, develop protocols, next steps - Haley 9. Evaluate meeting, set location (WDFW Mill Creek) and agenda for next meeting (Feb. 5th, 2009) BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027   Baker River Project License Implementation Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes January 8, 2009 ~ 9:00 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Mill Creek  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Anna Kopitov, and Jacob Venard (PSE); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Bob Nelson by phone (RMEF); David Geroux (WDFW); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS <ad> None NEXT TRIG MEETING: February 5, 2009, First Thursdays through 2009 NEXT BRCC MEETING: January 28, 2009 ACTION ITEMS All - Ensure your agency / organization has provided the BRCC w/ representative list Tony - Work w/ Cary re: simplified budget report sheet Tony - Ask BRCC about process and requirements for confirming / ratifying Resource Group pre-license milestones, agreements, and decisions Tony - Bring TRIG Norms and draft list of TRIG milestones, agreements, and decisions to Feb. mtg. Tony - Research who pays legally mandated costs of land ownership (ex: property taxes, road maintenance) ... PSE or Resource Group funds? Dave - Bring information on forage seed mix prescriptions / costs to Feb. mtg Dave - Talk with WDFW land mgr and Mike (e.g. Hurns Field) re: Reed Canarygrass management / conversion costs Kathy - Look up the Olympic Nat'l Forest elk forage list and the Baker Basin Elk Study plant list, give to Tony (for comparison of protein / elk forage value) Haley - Coordinate Bald Eagle site visit Anna - Update Habitat Matrix to include feedback to date, change priorities to classifications where appropriate PREVIOUS <ad> STILL RELEVANT <ad> ACTION ITEMS Marty - Email TRMP (Article 501) and updated TRMP implementation schedule to TRIG  Baker River Project License Implementation Final Meeting Notes, 1/8/2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4   All Jamie Tony Marty PSE -  Review TRMP (Article 501) and provide feedback / edits to Marty Bring Peanut Butter pie to Feb. mtg. Provide an accounting of TRIG funds (in "today's dollars," less expenditures) Draft a proposal for TRMP language re: financial processes (budget, audit, etc). Continue to work on the funding agreement and tracking process w/ USFS  UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS: Tony shared the 2008 elk capital budget summary analysis, which came directly from PSE's accounting software. It has not yet been updated to show 2009 funding, but does show "actual" for expenditures to date. At this time, approximately $85k has been charged against the Elk Capital Fund for property analysis, studies, and surveys. Tony noted that PSE employee and contractor time has generally not been charged against the Elk Capital Fund. Exceptions to this include a portion of PSE's contract with Ray/RMEF, consultant work on pre-acquisition surveys, and Ira's time when he was drawing up documents specifically for TRIG.  The report Tony brought shows PSE's internal cost tracking process. The group asked for a simplified TRIG and Elk Capital Fund budget sheet to show just the funding in 2006 and 2009 dollars (including the appropriate escalation factor using 2006$), and all expenditures charged against the capped funds to date (identified by property as appropriate).  Tony will work with Cary and the new project manager and will report back in February.  BRCC / LICENSE UPDATES Tony shared news that Paul Wetherbee (PSE's Baker Implementation Project Manager) has accepted a new position within PSE; we will meet the "new Paul" at our February meeting. In related updates, Linda Kupfer is now PSE's Compliance Program Manager for Hydro.  Tony noted that we are officially in Year One of the license, which means we're also in Year One of license funding. The next BRCC meeting is scheduled for January 28, 2009. This is when the BRCC and its Resource Groups will become official. Please be sure your agency has identified its representatives to the BRCC.  LAND ACQUISITION Article 505: Jacob joined us to discuss the Aquatic Riparian Habitat article. The settlement agreement calls for completion of an Aquatic Riparian Habitat Protection, Restoration, and Enhancement Plan within two years of license issuance, with a draft due within one year. The article also provides $50k/year for six years for planning and site evaluation activities.  Jacob asked the group for schedule availability for an Article 505 Working Group meeting. This group held an initial review / planning meeting December 1, 2007 with Jacob Venard, Anna Kopitov, Tony Fuchs; Bob Nelson; Brock Applegate; Don Gay; Cathy Baker; Scott Lentz; Rich Johnson; Jon-Paul Shannahan; and Stan Walsh in attendance.  The TRIG recommended piggybacking an Article 505 Working Group meeting with an ARG or TRIG meeting to reduce commuting and additional meeting days. Members with long commutes  Baker River Project License Implementation Final Meeting Notes, 1/8/2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 2 of 4   indicated 3 or 3:30 as the latest end-time for meetings that occur in Mill Creek. Properties X & Y: Tony shared an update on both properties; ask him for details. Reed Canary Grass: Tony researched Reed Canarygrass management and associated costs. Converting an area from Reed Canarygrass to another form of vegetation with higher forage value would be a multi-year project including mowing, multiple applications of herbicide, tilling, and seeding. While total eradication is not realistic, converting a specific pasture area within the context of a long-term land management plan could be done. Tony provided a rough estimate of the cost to convert 13 acres (two areas: one 10-acre, one 3acre)  YR 1 - Mow and brush out: about $5-10K YR 1 - Herbicide treatment: about $5-10K YR 2 - Mow, spot treat with herbicide, till and seed: about $15-20k** YR 3 and beyond <ad> mow, spot treat, till and spot seed as needed: about $5-10K ** Some forage seed mixes can be expensive, so the number above may be higher. Dave will bring information about WDFW seed mix prescriptions and costs to the February meeting. We discussed seed mix availability and forage nutritional values. Kathy will look up information about forage desirability (Olympic Nat'l Forest and Baker Basin Plant List) and email that to Tony and Dave for comparison of nutritional value. Dave will also talk with the WDFW land manager about Reed Canarygrass management / costs, and will call Mike (e.g. Hurns Field). HABITAT MATRIX Anna reported that she has received feedback from Haley, Stan, and Don. She walked us through an overview of the input to date. We discussed the priorities listed and noted that some of the categories listed as priorities could be more accurately described as classifications. Anna will incorporate this feedback and distribute an updated Habitat Matrix before the next meeting. MULTI-ARTICLE PROPERTY ACQUISITION Anna noted that the habitat matrix will be helpful as we look at properties that meet multiple articles. We discussed issues related to properties that meet this description, particularly the need to establish a clear process up-front that documents agreements and intentions. The Land Acquisition Process Teamlet will take this up next time they meet, and Anna will begin to gather and collate the various GIS data that are available in preparation for that meeting. BOTANICAL TEAMLET The Carex flava and Plants of Special Status plans are undergoing internal PSE review and should be available for TRIG review by the end of January. Anna will be issuing an RFP for the next Carex flava survey and asked for suggestions re: contractors. There are a limited number of qualified contractors for this task; the group agreed that the Carex Working Group and Hamer Environmental are appropriate options to issue an RFP to.  Baker River Project License Implementation Final Meeting Notes, 1/8/2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 3 of 4   TRMP Marty is on vacation and will rejoin us in February. Haley is working on the draft Legacy Wood plan and will have it available for review prior to our February meeting. LOON UPDATE Anna shared draft signage being developed to alert boaters and other recreational users about the loon platforms, which are on-target for installation by March 31. NIGHT ROOST SURVEYS The license calls for night roost surveys during two seasons, which overlap three years starting with year one of the license. Due to the timing of license issuance, we will treat this season as an opportunity to set up survey locations, develop protocols, and conduct the surveys starting at the end of this year. Haley reported that she spoke with Bob Carey (TNC) and he concurs with this plan. Haley will coordinate a site visit in the coming weeks to determine survey locations. Due to light attendance today, we moved the discussion about the Bald Eagle night roost survey plan and survey protocols to a future meeting. HANDOUTS Agenda and November 2008 meeting notes Proposed Bald Eagle Night Roost Survey Protocol AGENDA FOR NEXT TRIG MEETING February 5, 2009; 9 am <ad> 2 pm, Mill Creek 1. Welcome, review agenda, notes, and action items 2. BRCC Update 3. Review decision / agreement / milestones list 4. Review TRIG Norms 5. Review TRIG budget (Tony, Cary) 6. Botanical Teamlet <ad> Carex flava & Plants of Special Status Plans (Anna & Kathy) 7. Land acquisition update: a. Property Y Update (Ira & Tony) b. Reed Canarygrass management (Tony, Dave) c. Alternate Properties (Ray & Tony) d. Criteria matrix (Anna) 8. Review draft proposal for multi-article properties (Anna, Cary) 9. Review TRMP (Article 501) and updated TRMP implementation schedule (Marty) 10. Loon Update (Anna) 11. Review draft Legacy Wood plan (Haley) 12. Eagle Teamlet Meeting (Haley) a. Site visit report b. Develop protocols, next steps 13. Evaluate meeting, set next meeting agenda  Baker River Project License Implementation Final Meeting Notes, 1/8/2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 4 of 4    2009trig20090108.pdf en 