Final RRG Meeting Notes December 15, 2009 / 9:30 a.m. <ad> 2:00 Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009, 9:30 am - 2:00 pm WDFW Regional Office 16018 Mill Creek Blvd. Mill Creek, WA 98012-1541  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland, Haley Edwards, Cary Feldmann, and by phone: Lynda Kupfer and Kim Lane (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Paula Mann (Town of Concrete), Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Sergio Capozzi (AECOM), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) 2010 RRG MEETING DATES Feb. 16, April 20, June 15, Aug. 17, Oct. 19, Dec. 21 from 9:30 <ad> 2:30. We will look at providing WebEx capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEXT LEP MEETING February 16, 2010 at PSE Office in Burlington (immediately following the RRG meeting). NEW ACTION ITEMS Pam <ad> Send out preliminary draft of Resort Implementation Plan to all by December 28, 2009. All <ad> Review the Draft Resort Implementation Plan and give comments to Pam by February 16, 2010. All <ad> Review the Draft Rec Aesthetics Plan and provide comments to Pam by January 19, 2010. Ann <ad> Send out additional information supporting the FS request for $50K of RAM funding for Baker Resort Redevelopment to all by Jan 20. All <ad> Respond back to Pam yes / no to USFS request by January 25. Pam <ad> Set up RRG conference call (at front or back end of BRCC conference call on Jan. 27, 2010.) Cancel if we get consensus via email (see prior Action Item). Pam <ad> Send out Baker Recreation Implementation Schedule 2009-2011 to Lynda and Kim.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 5   PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Pam will continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) <ad> ongoing.  APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft October 20 RRG and LEP meeting notes without edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. We approved the draft LEP Meeting notes from their November 30 meeting with edits from Brock (WDFW) and Laurie (DNR). BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that they are moving BRCC meetings to a semi-annual schedule. Members are reserving the 4th Wednesday of each month for a conference call (from 9:00 <ad> 11:00). When BRCC members agree that a conference call is not needed, PSE will email an update of what is happening in each of the resource groups. Per Article 601 a 10 day notice will be provided to call a meeting. RECREATION PLAN UPDATES We discussed the difference between the management plans (submitted to FERC) and the implementation plans which are tailored to suit the needs of each resource group as they spell out specific on-the-ground actions taken to carry out the management plans. The implementation plans will only go to FERC after the work has been completed, in the form of reporting. The first annual report to FERC will include all the actions taken under the implementation plans, and will be due to FERC by April 30, 2010. Sergio walked us through preliminary drafts of these plans. He will include RRG feedback in the next draft that is sent out for all to review. Level of detail around actual expenditures needs to be worked out. The implementation plan would start with estimates. As it is reported to FERC, it would include actual expenditures. Baker Lake Resort Implementation Plan / Redevelopment Plan (SA 303) Baker Lake Resort Plan (BLRP) is waiting FERC review and approval. Pam will send out the preliminary BLRP-Implementation Plan to review by all. Baker Reservoir Water Safety Plan (SA 304) This plan is awaiting FERC review and approval. Baker Aesthetics Management Plan (SA 302) Sergio walked through the Preliminary Draft plan with the RRG. We will note that the USFS approach to aesthetic resources will likely change over time. Some jurisdictional issues will have to be addressed, in particular whether USFS will have to apply for a permit under Shoreline Management Act and Hydraulic Project Approval (HPA). (Comment: The USFS has a "Memorandum of Understanding" [MOU] or a Memorandum of Agreement [MOA] with WDFW, so USFS does not need an HPA. The National Environmental Policy Act [NEPA] process covers the Shoreline Management Act requirements.) There may be trees that are considered unnecessary in one context that have valuable habitat context in another. Brock expressed concern over the removal of hazard trees in relation to removal of threatened and endangered species habitat.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 5   Lower Baker Developed Recreation (SA 305) This is a long-term article. We are looking forward to participation from Brian Adams of Skagit County for this. Law Enforcement Plan (SA 318) Presented new revised draft of outline from Oct. 20 meeting at the Nov. 30 teamlet meeting. The 3 main procedures that will be described in this plan are: 1. Annual meeting and communication process to make sure all folks involved in Law enforcement activities get together twice a year <ad> at the start and end of the season (lessons learned, etc.) 2. Operations / implementation plan <ad> This will be updated on an annual basis and will describe such things as patrol, equipment needs, etc.) 3. Periodic training opportunities that PSE resource staff would offer to agencies (e.g., protection of cultural / historic resources,) This plan needs to be approved by this group. Do we need to wait until FERC approves the plan before we can go forward? Will PSE make the funding for the Law Enforcement article available before FERC approves the plan with the idea that FERC will mostly likely approve a collaboratively conceived plan? Teamlet members expressed strong desire to take preliminary actions prior to the start of the recreation season in 2010. The LEP will include a template for what the implementation plan looks like. They will review the first draft of the plan (for execution in 2010) at the Feb 16 meeting. Pam distributed copies of a memo from Whatcom County requesting 20k from the RAM fund for purchase of specific items including two chainsaws, winches and brush guards, etc. PSE and the USFS agreed to sponsor this request (as is necessary since Whatcom County did not sign the Settlement Agreement). We will consider this, along with other proposals at our February 16, 2020 meeting. We will discuss the best use of RAM and LEP funds. Recreation Management Report (SA 301) In progress. CROSS RESOURCE INITIATIVES Project Plant Restoration / Re-Vegetation Activities Ann reported that there was a meeting of PSE and Forest Service recreation and terrestrial (plant focus) folks on Dec. 13. A list of projects that may have a need for revegetation was developed and a list of "Workhorse" species of plants (plants PSE will use commonly during revegetation efforts). They discussed the plant list relative to the resort and the Baker Basin. They also discussed seed zones. The aim is to make sure native plants are locally adapted. They visited a local nursery on Dec. 10. They looked at what would need to be collected by when and also discussed a need for a holding area for plants, prior to planting. It points to the need for us to work closely with the botanists. There are actions that the USFS is taking that PSE doesn't have authority over. They can make recommendations. They also discussed the need to protect sensitive plants in Lower Sandy. They went out and walked that site. Cultural / Historical Resources Protection of cultural resources at Horseshoe Cove. The CRAG is proposing hardening the site. Stay tuned.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 5   Bears There are ongoing discussions in the USFS re how to best protect bears from garbage.  ARTICLE 601: LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK We discussed this article and observed that the consensus model was set up to encourage decisions to be made at the resource group level. A quorum is necessary if we take a vote on something. Normal consensus decisions can be taken by members present at the meeting. An official quorum is not necessary for consensus decisions to occur. For a quorum there must be a rep from tribes, state, federal, and the licensee. Non-consensus decisions (after two votes) can be taken to the BRCC to decide (by voting).  ANNUAL REPORTING Cary reported that the Annual Report to FERC for 2009 is due to FERC April 30, 2011. The comprehensive annual report will be out for review by January 30, 2011. Kim and Greta will work on creating a schedule for when individual reports should be out in draft for review. Funds are budgeted as of January 1st for each year.  REQUEST FOR FUNDING We discussed the following question: Shall the Recreation Resource Group (RRG) allocate the 2009 RAM Funds, $50,000 (2006 dollars) to the USDA-FS for the Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment?  Ann explained that this request was to allow the USFS to complete the resort redevelopment as planned, including accessibility requirements that were not initially known. She agreed to send something out that defines what the USFS would do with and without this additional funding so members have a better idea of how the funds would be spent before making a decision on this request. We will attempt to make this decision prior to our February meeting.  RECREATION IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE Pam distributed an initial draft of the Recreation Implementation Schedule based on the tasks and format outlined by Greta. We will review this in more detail at our February 16, 2010 meeting. NEXT RRG MEETING AGENDA TOPICS BRCC Update Proposal from Whatcom County LEP Preliminary Draft Preliminary comments on Aesthetics (302) and Implementation Plan for the Resort Cross Resource Issues Review Recreation Implementation Schedule Discuss Form and Method for Annual Reporting <ad> SA 301 Other Updates? Set April 20 Meeting Agenda for RRG (9:30 <ad> 10:30) Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS October 20, 2009 Notes from RRG and Law Enforcement Meetings November 30 Notes from Law Enforcement Meeting (with edits)  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 5   December 15, 2009 Agenda Article 601: License Implementation Framework Article 602: Required Funding Memo dated 12-10-09 from deputy Jeff Turner of Whatcom County re: RAM Fund Request MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Statue discussions Cream puffs! Clarification on 601 and 602 articles Good implementation discussions Sergio's presence Do Differently: Broader attendance (few attendees) More cream puffs!  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes December 15, 2009  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 5 of 5    2009rrg20091215.pdf en 