 Baker River Project License Implementation Meeting Title: Recreational & Aesthetic Resources Working Group Meeting Date: Tuesday April 21, 2009 Time: 9:30-2:00 Location: WA Dept of Fish and Wildlife 16018 Mill Creek Blvd Mill Creek, WA 98012-1541 425-775-1311 Facilitator-Lyn Wiltse-cell-(425)-890-3613 Pam Garland-(360)-424-2912/cell (360)-661-2243 AGENDA FOR RRG MEETING April 21, 2009 9:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. Note: Estimated times are approximate. 9:30- 9:50 1. Welcome, Review Notes, Action Items, Agenda 9:50-10:15 2. BRCC Update/Master Implementation and Reporting Schedule Review- (Cary) 3. Decisions Required at Today’s meeting (none at this time) 10:15-10:45 4. Resort Redeveloment Plan-status update  Review revisions to Resort Redevelopment Plan  Incorporate USFWS and WDFW letters of concurrence into notes  Discuss Cultural Review needs  Next steps  Resort Redevelopment Schedule 10:45-11:00 5. Break 11:00-12:00 6. Plan Development and schedule (Sergio Capozzi)  Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (BRRWSP)  Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan (BLRP)  Law Enforcement Plan (LEP) 12:00-12:15 7. Evaluate meeting/Set June meeting agenda NEW ACTION ITEMS  All-Come to April 21 meeting prepared to officially approve the Resort Redevelopment Plan  Dave-Coordinate w/Rich Johnson to identify WDFW reps to BRCC & RRG  Haley-Type up field notes and send out to all by March 20  Jamie-Incorporate changes onmaps to reflict agreements made during today’s field trip. Ensure they are consistent with Haley’s field notes. Send out by March 20.  Dave-Send Pam letter on WDFW letterhead stating that if USFWS is okay with the plan then WDFW concurs (by March 20).  Pam-Send out revised letter to USFWS by March 24.  LouEllyn-Email affirmative response to Pam’s letter by end of March.  Ann-Begin process of gaining USFS staff approval of resort re-development plan.  Pam-Connect with Lyn to ID potential dates to meet with agencies regarding Law Enforcement Plan. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS  Haley-Draft Consultation notes for submission w/concurrence plan (use Dave’s example).  Pam-Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E). CONFERENCE CALL INFORMATION: Dial in from your phone: Meeting Place Main Number 425-456-2500 Internal Number 81-2500 Toll Free Number 888-228-0484 Meeting ID: 1535 Password: 12345 Driving Instructions: To drive to the Mill Creek office: from I-5, take Exit 183 onto 164th Street Southeast. Continue eastbound about 1.5 miles. At the bottom of the hill, turn left onto Mill Creek Boulevard. Look for us on the left about 1 ½ blocks north directly across from Bank of America. Parking is available. The WDFW Mill Creek office general phone number is 425 775 1311. Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes April 21, 2009, 1:00 am - 3:00 pm WDFW Office, Mill Creek FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if plans to attend the meeting change) Note: To verify whether a meeting will occur during inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstance, call Pam Garland the morning of the meeting at home: 360-826-3087 or cell: 360-661-2243. PRESENT Pam Garland, (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Jamie DeVanter (Van DeVanter Group), David Geroux (WDFW); Sergio Capozzi (EDAW) and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT RRG MEETING DATES**NOTE CHANGE IN LOCATION! June 16 and August 18 2009 to be held at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. NEW ACTION ITEMS  Dave Coordinate w/ Rich Johnson to identify WDFW reps to BRCC & RRG.  Pam Send out directions to PSE Skagit Office in Burlington along with June 16 agenda.  Jamie Add the old project boundary line to drawings and give Elizabeth the latest version of all the resort development drawings.  Pam Send out Jim Eychaner’s comments on Water Safety Plan to all and copy Sergio.  Sergio By April 24 send out revised drafts of Water Safety and Resort Redevelopment plans for all to review.  All Review Water Safety Plan that Pam emailed out on March 31. Let her know if you need her to re-send it to you. Send her your comments on the plan by May 12.  All Review Resort Redevelopment plan and send Pam your comments by May 22.  Pam Send out revised draft Resort Re-development plan to all by April 29.  Pam Send out all comments on plans as you receive them.  Pam Send Sergio decommissioning document.  Ann When possible, send Pam detailed engineering email to support Greta’s Oct. 2008 decommissioning letter. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, April 21, 2009 Page 1 of 4  Dave Contact Bill Hebner (WDFW) re consultation on the Law Enforcement Plan – possible to attend a meeting on June 16? Copy the Working Group.  Pam Set up Law Enforcement Plan initial consultation to coincide with meeting on June 16 if possible. Include Concrete, Whatcom Co., Skagit Co., Jeremy Smith of USFS, Baker Operators, Plant manager, etc. Send out instructions for how to get to Burlington PSE Office for that meeting.  Lyn Check with Stan about tribal participation in the Law Enforcement Plan meeting on June 16 (done). He will check with Ted – it is unlikely that they would attend. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Formatted: Bullets and Numbering  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration as needed (ex: I&E) - ongoing. APPROVAL OF MARCH 18, 2009 MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft March Meeting notes without edits. BRCC UPDATE Lyn reported that the BRCC did not meet last month. PSE sent out a written update of the activities of each of the resource working groups to all in lieu of the meeting. The next meeting will be April 22. RESORT REDEVELOPMENT UPDATE Review Revisions Jamie displayed updated versions of the development plans for the resort. We reviewed the plans and discussed the changes. USFWS and WDFW letters of Concurrence Pam distributed hard copies of the WDFW letter of concurrence authored by Dave Geroux and email from Lou Ellen Jones for USFWS offering support for proceeding with the redevelopment plans. Cultural Review Needs Article 203 of the license brings additional pieces of land into the PSE FERC project boundary. Even though we have been planning for the Baker Lake Resort to become a FS campground, it is included in the FERC boundary and therefore PSE is required to meet the obligations of the license. The USFS will be operating the campgrounds as concessionaire. There does not appear to have been adequate cultural review of the resort area to date. Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE team leader of the Baker Cultural resource Advisory Group) has contracted with a consultant (and tribes will be invited to participate) to perform that review in early May. We will wait for their report before engaging in any ground disturbing activities. Their recon survey will extend 50 feet from the project boundary, particularly around the entrance area. Jamie is in the process of getting a CAD drawing to Elizabeth to show the trenching planned for the utilities. Elizabeth feels she has now received everything she needs to proceed. Next Steps / Schedule  Jamie will give Elizabeth the latest version of all the resort development drawings.  Management Plan (playground) development. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, April 21, 2009 Page 2 of 5 The Management Plan will meet the intent of the license article. Ann is working on a design narrative for the Forest that follows their criteria. Jamie has written a design narrative that explains our approach. We are doing a management plan and a procedures and implementation plan (the games we play) for FERC. The implementation plan would explain how we met the terms and conditions of the license. We will need a paper trail of how the funds are used and submit this information in a report to FERC on an annual basis. Review of Draft Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan Sergio walked us through a draft of the Water Safety Plan. He took material form the license article and called out specific components of it, using the template PSE has provided for use across all resource groups. This plan lists, at a high level, the goals and objectives required to implement the plan, along with a general description of the process used to meet these. Sergio took comments (such as enlarging the designated swimming area at Horseshoe Cove) on the plan and will integrate them into the next version that he will send out to all for the 30 day review. We will refer to the cultural survey being performed and describe how we could respond to their findings. The schedule called out in the plan is specific to meeting License Article requirements. This plan has to be submitted to FERC by October 1. We will aim to do the review in the summer and submit the plan to FERC sometime in September. All will comment on this plan by May 12. We will set the schedule for creating the more-detailed implementation plan will be defined by the working group on the heels of agreeing on the management plan. Even though the implementation plan is not due to FERC on a certain schedule, the actions contained within it are. We will likely define key milestones that signal reporting on progress to other members of working group. Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan Sergio walked us through the current draft of this plan and asked for high-level comments. He will incorporate comments (such as how we refer to the design development drawings) into a revised version of the plan and send it out for all to review. Resort Redevelopment Plan:  Submit Management / Process Plan to FERC by May 29.  Submit comments to Pam by May 22. (Let Pam know even if you have no comments to submit.)  Pam will distribute revised draft plan to all by April 29. There are 3 main components of the Implementation Plan: 1. Concurrency Review – should be complete by mid May. USFS to send 4(e) letter to PSE. 2. Decommissioning Strategy – level of detail needed for USFS to sign off? Ann will ask Greta if she can share additional level of engineering review with Pam. By May 22 Pam will provide information on how PSE plans to implement the requirements they received from Greta in October 2008 letter. Decommissioning must start Sept. 16 and conclude by Dec. 31, 2009. 3. Site Design Drawings – need design narrative and criteria and cost estimate before USFS can sign off on those. Ann thinks we are close. We will get the whole plan package to Sergio by June 2 and he will get it out to the group for review by Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, April 21, 2009 Page 3 of 5 the June 16 Working Group meeting – which will start the 30 day review. Greta will be copied on all major correspondence. Law Enforcement Plan Pam and Lyn have been talking with Mark Hunter of WDFW re: their participation in an initial consultation that needs to take place within a year of license issuance. Dave suggested that Bill Hebner would be the WDFW person to contact regarding the agency’s participation in the development of this plan. Captain Hebner is the head of enforcement for this region. He may participate directly or he may want to delegate to someone else. The idea behind this is to improve safety, security, and communication (cell towers, etc) around Baker Lake. What level of law enforcement do we need? We want also look at the bigger picture. We will want tribal and county participation as well as resource participants. Lyn will check with Stan Walsh on this. Next Agenda  BRCC Update  Review the Master Implementation Schedule and the Master Reporting Schedule (Cary)  Review updated Proposal for Concurrence (Pam, Ann)  Review updated versions of draft Recreation Plans (Water Safety and Resort Redevelopment)  Review plan timelines  Conduct initial consultation for the Law Enforcement plan. Handouts  March 18 Notes and April 21 Agenda  WDFW letter of concurrence  USFWS email of concurrence Meeting Evaluation Worked Well:  We still have Dave!  Great food  Very productive meeting!  Sergio’s draft documents and guidance  Jamie’s drawings  Accomplished all out Action Items from the last meeting  Patrick’s insights Do Differently:  Law Enforcement Plan initial consultation to occur at / before or after our next meeting on June 16.  We will meet at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington for our next meeting June 16. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes, April 21, 2009 Page 4 of 5  