Final RRG Meeting Notes June 15, 2010 / 9:30 a.m. <ad> 12:00 p.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA 98233  Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meting Final Conference Call Notes June 15, 2010 9:30 pm <ad> 12:00 pm Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland, Haley Edwards, and Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Sergio Capozzi (AECOM), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) 2010 RRG MEETING DATES Aug. 17, Oct. 19, Dec. 21 from 9:30 <ad> 2:30. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEW ACTION ITEMS All Send any water safety messaging to Pam ASAP. Pam Meet with Ann re swimming delineation for water safety tear sheet maps. Pam Send out 3 different options for front and back of draft tear sheet map for Water Safety by end of June. All Review tear map alternatives (see above) and send comments on messaging and maps to Pam. REPORT ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Pam Worked with Ann to set dates to work Water Safety Plan implementation actions and send out notification to team members so they may join, if desired. Sergio is drafting the tear sheet map. Plan to present it for approval at August RRG meeting. Needs to be complete by October of 2010 <ad> and ready for use for the 2011 season. Pam Is coordinating with USFS to formulate PSE response to USFWS re bear resistant trash containers. PSE has sent this proposal into USFWS. Aim is for this to be complete by October of this year. In the meantime USFS and PSE are both operating in a way that is compliant with the license. Next step: PSE will utilize the input from the Forest Service in their response to USFWS and give us an update at out next meeting. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) <ad> ongoing.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes June 15, 2010  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4   APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft April 20 RRG meeting notes without edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. BRCC UPDATE The BRCC last met on June 8 after the ARG meeting at the Baker River Lodge. The meeting included updates from the various resource groups and discussion of the new powerhouse proposal and associated amendment process. They plan to meet in person again on October 27. BRCC members continue to reserve 9:00 <ad> 11:00 on the mornings of the fourth Wednesday in case a conference call is required to resolve any issues elevated by one of the resource working groups. UPDATE ON USFS BIDS RE BAKER LAKE CONSTRUCTION Ann reported that they have received corrected bids from the contractors. Award is pending. After that they will draft the letter requesting additional RAM funds. They will send it first to PSE to review for format, etc. Then they will send it out to all to review. It may be in time for discussion at the August 17 meeting. UPCOMING DECISION REQUESTED BY THE USFS Ann reported that the USFS decision request for 2010 RAM Funding is being held until they have more information after awarding the construction contract for the Baker Lake Resort development. When that information becomes available, the USFS will send a draft proposal to PSE to review for completeness. After incorporating feedback from PSE they will send it out to RRG members at least one week in advance of the decision meeting in order to provide sufficient review time. RECREATION PLAN / IMPLEMENTATION UPDATES Recreation Management Report (SA 301) Pam reported that PSE is conducting an internal review of an early draft of this plan. As this is a year 3 license requirement, it must be out by October, 2011. Draft Aesthetics Management Plan (SA 302) Pam reported that this plan has gone through the formal 30-day review, with comments due by April 30. They have incorporated comments and changes based on those comments. The plan is now undergoing internal review at PSE. It will be e-filed with FERC by June 30. Pam will send it out for final review before then. Jamie Van DeVanter is working on a design for the screening of the fencing along FS 1106 and the discharge area by West Pass Dike at Upper Baker. Pam will share a draft design proposal at our August meeting. Baker Lake Resort Plan (SA 303) Pam reported that we submitted this plan to FERC in October of 2009 and we are still awaiting their approval. In the meantime, we have begun working on the annual report, due the end of July. Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (SA 304) FERC approved this plan in January of this year. Currently, Sergio is working on the tear sheet maps which will identify recreational opportunities as well as boating and water safety considerations. These will be posted on the new bulletin boards the Forest Service has constructed. By the end of this month he  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes June 15, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 4   will send out three sample fronts and 3 sample backs for all to review. In the meantime, he welcomes any suggestions from RRG members re messaging. He hopes that we will be able to review a near final draft at our August meeting (after he has incorporated member feedback). Ann cautioned that we may want to step back and decide what all we want to include on the new bulletin boards all together (e.g., loon platforms, etc.) We also want the boards to have a finished look (making use of a common format and color scheme). Haley reminded us that License Article 410 calls for posting information about protecting bull trout. We will look at setting up a teamlet (including PSE Corporate Communications representation) to address this in the fall. Lower Baker Developed Recreation (SA 305) Pam is keeping in communication with the PMs on the FSC and is also discussing this with Elizabeth Dubreuil (the lead of the Cultural Resource Advisory Group). There is not a lot of specific work being done on this currently as the details of the Lower Baker FSC are still being defined. It appears that its construction will include part of the boat launch area which PSE is maintaining. Pam reported that the PSE maintenance crew has incorporated Lake Shannon into their work rounds. They are employing a variety of techniques to keep people out of certain areas. Law Enforcement Plan (SA 318) Comments were received from RRG members on this plan by May 10. As with the Aesthetics Plan, Sergio is working on integrating comments into the next version of the plan. This is set to be e-filed to FERC by June 30 of this year. The plan is to get both plans out for final look before they are submitted. ANNUAL REPORT SCHEDULE Pam reported that she is working on the annual reports to FERC. The first set is due July 31st of this year. CROSS RESOURCE ISSUES Cultural Work at Horseshoe Cove Elizabeth reported that PSE engineers are working on designs and drawings. She has also met with one of their hydrologists to ensure everyone is well informed and on the same page. They plan to do this work with low or no water (below full pool line). Regular BMPs will be in place. They are also coordinating with the planning person for USACE work. PSE will send the plan to Greta for USFS distribution. At this point they are planning to do this work in the February - March 2011 timeframe. They will be distributing some initial design drawings in July of this year. AUGUST 17 RRG MEETING TOPICS BRCC Update Decision on Forest Service request for RAM Funding Bear Trash Containers Update Cross Resource Issues Plan Updates Annual Reports Bulletin Board Teamlet Terrestrial Update Other Updates? Set October 19 Meeting Agenda for RRG  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes June 15, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 4   Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS April 20, 2010 notes from RRG Meetings (no edits) June 15, 2010 Agenda MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  WebEx and conference call Got out early Do Differently: Broader attendance  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes June 15, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 4    2010-06-15_RRG_FinalNotes.pdf en 