 Final LEP Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 / 12:30 p.m. – 3:00 p.m. Baker River Project License Implementation Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 12:30 pm - 3:00 pm PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Kinsey Shilling (NPS), Jeff Turner (Whatcom County), Brock Applegate, Sgt. Mike Hobbs and Capt. Bill Hebner (WDFW), Pam Garland, Lloyd Pernela, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Ann Dunphy, Greta Movassaghi, Capt. Kim Kinville, and Jeremy Smith, (USFS); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT MEETING DATE We agreed to meet again on February 15, 2011, following the RRG meeting. ACTION ITEMS  Ann Share After Action Report on LEP expenditures when available.  Pam Send attendance list / contact info of LEP team members to Mike and Kim.  Pam Send everyone a copy of the LEP that was submitted to FERC.  Mike See if it is possible to redeploy WDFW boats to Baker for 2011 season  Pam Check into access and storage for WDFW boat(s).  Pam Set up teamlet to recommend how to address boat launch and parking issues between July 4 and Labor Day (assuming another strong sockeye fishery in 2011). Include Mike, Kim, Lloyd, Ann, Hoo Doo rep, others?  Bill Check into shared enforcement authority for wake zones  Pam Meet with Bill and Kim re tracking form to assess effectiveness of LEP expenditures. Also discuss WDFW staff contract. LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN STATUS Pam explained that the LEP was filed with FERC on June 30 and is awaiting approval. Since the plan is considered complete, the PSE funding for PSE actions in an accumulating fund is now available. LEP EXPENDITURES Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 Page 1 of 4 Ann explained that the Forest Service used a large portion of the money for OT for Jeremy and others and negotiated a contract with Whatcom County for their coverage and also funded some equipment purchases. She will share a more detailed report shortly as the FS is at the end of their fiscal year. Jeremy shared the following summary of the outcome of the 300 OT hours:  13 incidents  107 criminal violations  113 warnings He further disclosed that many of the issues revolved around drug and alcohol use, paraphernalia, wood cutting, vandalism, loud groups, sanitation, trash, campfire, illegal wood cutting, poaching, off-road vehicle use, and illegal fishing. There was also the apprehension of a stalker, a sex offender slashing tires and being aggressive, felony drug arrests, dogs off leash, a gang member growing marijuana in the Baker Basin, parking violations, and multiple warrant arrests (felonies). There was a motorist assist, an abandoned property (sail boat), boat vessel violations, fireworks, shooting, disorderly conduct, indecent exposure, 2 fires, lost hikers assisted, fishing guides guiding without a license to do so, impersonation of campground hosts, illegal cutting of vegetation, impersonation of a park ranger, DUI – child endangerment, and a guy impersonating a Park Ranger. REVIEW OF 2010 SEASON Well Done  300 OT hours by USFS  Whatcom County contract was complete by mid-August  Record sockeye return – outstanding rec opportunity  Equipment purchases were well used  PSE has provided a service contract with Whatcom County Sheriff’s Office for OT coverage on holiday weekends and opening weekend of the fish season ($13K for 200 hours). This has been provided by Baker plant operations for the past seven years, including 2010. This is linked to decrease of criminal activity in campgrounds o Any future funding will come out of $73K to FS and $22K PSE annual funding.  Cell phone communication is better Do Differently  Need to establish a contract for WDFW to do OT to handle boating safety issues, aquatic species checks and aquatic invasive weed checks.  Many defective boats  Sockeye: Lots of issues with drinking and fishing  Sockeye: Campground hosts had hard time collecting fees from early fisherman – campers complained about the noise  Need for more / shared vessel(s) on lake o Storage location (PSE) o Fund fuel, maintenance, staffing (need training) o Important to have a consistent presence  Parking and boat launch issues (July 4 through Labor Day) o Set up contract with WDFW so they can post signs (load/unload, parking, etc.) Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 Page 2 of 4 o Manage w/ FPOs and staffing o Need enforcement capability  Need to address harvest compliance and boating safety  Need more patrols around rec sites, loon platforms  Radio Communication is very poor once leave vehicle – Need in-car repeaters (one has been ordered)  Need to know when WDFW is in the area (have been times when responded and WDFW officer was already on site.  Re no wake zones: Both state and federal laws apply. We need to identify key areas and buoy them – this makes it easier to enforce. No wake usually means 10 miles per hour or less. We need to figure out what is practical and safety impact for swim beach. Need mutual authorities for enforcement. Suggestion  Create form to track stats – all entities to use to rack LEP funding – roll into annual report. COVERAGE / EQUIPMENT NEEDS FOR 2011 SEASON – INCL. APPROXIMATE COSTS In-car repeaters (2 more @ $1,300 each) o Note: Do pilot study with Jeff’s phone)  Cell phone boosters (2 more @ $500 each)  Boats (Mike is checking on redeploying possibly at least one dedicated, two more available as needed, WDFW boats for the season)  County radio for Darrington (1 @ $1,500)  Chain saw (1 @ $850)  Patrol rifle (1 @ $1,000)  Staffing: WDFW additional boat patrols (multiple officers at approx. 500 hours)  Staffing: Continue Whatcom County OT coverage (1 officer at approx. 200 hours)  Night vision goggles (1 at $3,500)  Bear trap (1 @ $8,500)  Deer decoy (1 @ $2,200) RECREATION FUNDING ALLOCATIONS FOR 2010 LAW ENFORCEMENT MEETING EVALUATION Well Done:  Welcome to Kim and Mike!  Food was great  Room worked well  Great participation by all  Good focus throughout the meeting  Entertaining meeting  Good forward movement  Research  Got out early Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 Page 3 of 4 Do Differently:  Group counseling may be helpful. TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON FEBRUARY 15 Planning for a Successful Season:  Report on Action Items  Prioritize spending for 2011 season HANDOUTS  April 20, 2010 notes from LEP Meeting  October 19, 2010 Agenda Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 19, 2010 Page 4 of 4  