Final Meeting Notes October 7th, 2010 / 9 a.m. <ad> 1 p.m. / Burlington, Web-X, Call     Baker River Project License Implementation    Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Burlington: Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Mel Walters, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Lou Ellyn Jones by phone (USFWS); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA)  DECISION TODAY: None  TRIG MEETINGS: November 4, December 2 NEXT BRCC MEETING: October 27, Cottontree Inn  Phrase of the Day: Them thar high-falutin' consultants (aka: Marty)  ACTION ITEMS   Tony Put a S.A. 514 conversation on the TRIG's Nov. agenda   All  Review 514, consider application to Alder Creek, other properties   Tony Distribute the final Alder Creek Program Document (hard-copy to Patrick)   Tony Coordinate a field trip to Property X (invite Bob K.), tentatively scheduled for Nov. 3   Tony Distribute the acreage table for Property X   All  Let Tony know if you would like to attend the field trip to Property X   Tony Coordinate Alder Creek DNR Teamlet, including Brock, Haley, Marty, and Bob N.; invite  Don, Chris D., Chris M.   Haley Email TRIG the cost breakdown for tree modification (osprey nests, legacy wood)   Haley Coordinate Eagle Night Roost Surveys  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS: Kim & Gretta Develop accounting procedures to put left-over Late Seral Forest money into TERF  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually. Cary reported that the next in-person meeting is scheduled for October 27 at the Best Western Cottontree Inn in Mount Vernon and asked anyone with agenda items for the BRCC meeting to send them to him.  Budget Update: TRIG agreed that a quarterly report will be sufficient. The next one will come in December.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 10/07/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Late Seral Forest Money / TERF Update: Neither Kim nor Gretta attended today. We will check back next meeting to see how this is progressing. 505 QUESTION Stan asked TRIG members to be thinking about which plants would be appropriate for Aquatic Riparian Habitat (Article 505) projects. Since Bob K. isn't here, he will connect with him off-line. Scott noted that Article 302 requires a plant list; Tony suggested this would be included in the proposals submitted by potential "action" sponsors. Brock recommended not replanting with red alder (Alnus rubra) as it will grown on the site without replanting. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira updated the group on his conversations with the Skagit Land Trust. He also reported that the appraisal and timber cruise are underway for Properties X and should be available for the TRIG by the November meeting. Tony reported on the estimated acreages of elk, wetland, and forest habitats on site. He will distribute the table to the TRIG. Ira has also hired the appraiser for Property G; this one might not be ready in time for the November meeting, but Ira's trying to get it expedited. The group talked about the potential management objectives and options relative to Property X. Attendees reiterated the point that all properties will have a variety of habitats and potential management possibilities. Decisions about which funds contribute to any given purchase require thoughtful consideration and are a balance of what is available and the TRIG's highest priorities. Tony will coordinate a field trip, tentatively scheduled for November 3. He proposed that the TRIG talk at the November meeting, decide an upper limit for Ira's negotiation, and determine at that time which fund(s) will contribute to the purchase. Questions? Need a reminder about which letter goes with which actual parcel? Ask Tony or Ira. ALDER CREEK POST-ACQUISITION UPDATES As an aside, Tony shared that he and some members of his professional association took a field trip to the Alder Creek property after a recent meeting and they found a good number of elk on the property. :) Program Document: TRIG reviewed the Alder Creek Program Document, made a few final edits and approved it as final. It is a working document and will be subject to routine and "as needed" updates, but the group agreed the document is complete and accurate for now. WhoHoo! Meeting w/ DNR: Tony reported on the meeting he and Ira had with folks from DNR re: the Alternate Forest Management Plan. They suggested PSE write two documents: a long-term (15-year) forest practices application and an alternative plan. The alternative plan would outline what TRIG proposes doing differently, which in our case would be for not replanting areas cleared (or harvested) with tree species but with forage species and show how this alternative plan would be beneficial for wildlife as opposed to timber production. For the long-term forest practices application, Phase I includes an assessment of roads and critical areas (streams, wetlands, steep slopes, ground water recharge areas). For this phase, we still need to identify stream corridors. Brock asked how much detail is needed for this; Tony thinks it will be sufficient to map them and label them as fish bearing or not and year-round or seasonal. Phase II will be to identify the approximate schedule and high-level description of proposed actions. This could be organized around the polygons the TRIG has already identified for the Alder Creek Program Document. Once completed, the long-term forest practices application and alternate plan would go out for review. Tony noted that the reviewing agencies are all signatories to the settlement. Marty and Tony both think SEPA won't be needed. Someone asked whether this process could be done once to cover all the properties to be acquired for the license. A separate application must be submitted for each property.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 10/7/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4    TRIG agreed that the bottom line of what Tony and Ira learned is good news. The information required for DNR is all within a level of detail the TRIG wants anyway and it sounds like there won't be a need to go through a conversion process for the property.  Tony asked TRIG to authorize PSE to complete the fieldwork noted above (mapping critical areas, estimated to cost $5k-$6k) and asked for volunteers for a teamlet to create the DNR docs. Tony thinks the work will take a couple meetings, including a field trip. Kathy pointed out that this is a great time to get the work done; with the leaves down, GPS will be fast and easy. The TRIG authorized the work and the following folks volunteered for the teamlet: Brock, Tony, Haley, and Marty. Bob N. may not be able to make it to the meetings, but he would like to be kept informed. It was also suggested that Chris D., Chris M., and Don Gay might be interested. Tony will coordinate.  Tony also reported that the gates and blocks were installed. He showed pictures of the work over lunch.  BOTANICAL UPDATE The teamlet meeting was postponed to later this month due to scheduling conflicts. Scott reported that the seed collector went on-site at Baker and the seeds are being sown now. Plants should be available late next fall. The first application of herbicide has been applied to the Reed Canary Grass at specific sites. Even though the site isn't in water, Baker staff members are using aquatic herbicide to be on the safe side. Scott is also working with Pam Garland (RRG team leader, PSE) to get started on Article 302 work. He noted that with the ivy removed from the spawning beach area - he thinks the next priority will be Herb Robert and Canada thistle.  OSPREY NEST TREE UPDATE WhoHoo! Mel reported that eleven trees were completed by late September, thus meeting the timeline in the article and instigating applause to have implementation complete for article 506 work! (Surveys and O&M will continue, of course.) A couple more trees were completed October 2. Mel showed the group a PowerPoint with photos of the work. The average nest height is 190 feet. Mel and Haley noted that they observed osprey circling the area near the modified trees. Mel is happy to report that he really thinks osprey will want to use these.  Haley reported on costs, which are estimated to total $15k-$18k. TRIG agreed that the contractor did a good job for a good price. Haley noted that, in addition to the trees modified for nesting purposes, nine adjacent trees were modified to ensure prominence (dominance) of the targeted nest tree, as discussed at previous TRIG meetings. Of those nine additionally modified trees, eight are well suited to be legacy wood. The cost for modifying those trees was about $4,500 of the total noted above. The Legacy Wood calls for $35k of funding in each of the first two years and $10k / year thereafter. Haley will email the cost breakdown to the full TRIG.  EAGLE NIGHT ROOST SURVEYS Haley distributed a copy of the protocol, which mirrors last year's. Brock pointed out and Haley agreed that a roost management plan will still be required if the buffer overlaps project land, even if the actual nest is on an adjacent owner's land. Haley will invite participants and schedule the actual survey dates. FYI - The boat launch area is needed for the FSC construction; the area to the south of the current launch may be used as a temporary launch site.  Meeting Evaluation: Today's Burlington room (downstairs) much preferred over the upstairs room Fun to celebrate completion: Alder Creek Program Doc, Osprey nest tree modification. WhoHoo! Homemade goodies a plus! (Thanks, Kathy!) "Rowdy" crowd; "adequate" facilitation  Draft November 4 Agenda BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 10/7/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4    9 am <ad> 3 pm, Burlington (Snoqualmie next time?) Acquisition - Review of appraisals, site visit report, determine parameters for Property X Alder Creek DNR Teamlet Update Botanical Update Eagle Night Roost Survey Update Other items?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 10/7/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2010trig20100710.pdf en 