 RRG Final Meeting Notes November 16, 2010 / 9:00 a.m. – Noon / Baker Lake Lodge Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes November 16, 2010 9:00 am – 2:00 pm Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland, Scott Heller, Kim Lane, and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Ann Dunphy and Greta Movassaghi (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Sergio Capozzi (AECOM), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) 2011 RRG MEETING DATES  Hold 9:00 – 11:00 am on these dates for potential conference calls: Mar. 15, Apr. 19, May 17, July 19, Aug. 16, Sept. 20, Nov. 15, Dec. 20  In-Person Meetings: Feb. 15 (followed by LEP Meeting), June 21 (including field trip to Swift Creek Campground), Oct. 18 (followed by LEP Meeting). We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEW ACTION ITEMS  All Give any additional info on maps to Pam by Thanksgiving.  Sergio Send out revised version of maps to all for review during second week of December.  All Get any final feedback on maps to Pam by December 17.  Pam Set up Bulletin Board teamlet and be prepared to report on progress at February 15, 2011 meeting.  Pam Send Upper Baker Screening plan to PSE Security department for any input. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization.  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) – ongoing. APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft October 19 RRG and LEP meeting notes with edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Draft Meeting Notes November 16, 2010 Page 1 of 5 Cary reported that the BRCC met in person at the CottonTree Inn in Mt. Vernon on October 27 from 9:30 – 2:00. Topics included:  Designated representatives discussion  Baker Spawning Survey Discussion  Baker 107(c) Flood Storage Update  Working Group Updates  Baker License Website Update  Land Ownership Policy of PSE for Acquisitions  SA 602 Project Evaluation System  Missed opportunities for communication (lessons learned) around Baker spawning survey  The unintended consequences surrounding large sockeye fishery (disruption to campgrounds, overflowing boat ramps, etc.) and the opportunity for improved and continuous dialogue among the parties affected for future seasons.  Lower Baker FSC Change of Direction to incorporate lessons learned from Upper Baker FSC and address budgetary constraints. Also interface with Fish Passage Technical Working Group (need improved communication here as well) Cary will send out a summary of working group activities for the month of November before the end of the month. The next in-person meeting is scheduled for spring of 2011. FIELD TRIP TO SWIFT CREEK CAMPGROUND CONSTRUCTION Ann hosted the field trip and pointed out construction plans and challenges including unanticipated additional costs around accessibility and drainage. DECISION: “Shall the RRG approve USFS Request for 2010 RAM funds, in the amount of 50K ($2006) to be used for the purpose of continued development of the Baker Lake Resort?” Ann and Greta addressed questions around their request for 2010 RAM Funding, explaining that a decision today would help inform the contractor re the spring construction schedule and activities. They want to begin construction as soon as the snow will allow. Knowing the funding level is critical to the planning process. The FS cannot open the facility if they do not meet safety and accessibility requirements. Brock expressed concern that the RAM funds can also be used for purposes of law enforcement and that perhaps it was premature to vote on how to allocate these funds until the law enforcement needs have been addressed. Greta explained that we have collectively agreed to use law enforcement funding to satisfy the law enforcement need. She believes that in operating in good faith we should continue to use law enforcement funds for law enforcement expenditures. Issues with grade and settling and compaction were unanticipated and these funds would be used to address these areas. Ann explained that re the actual construction, the experts found that the original design as constructed was not meeting standards and remediation was required. The FS had zero contingency in the construction budget because the bid came in higher than anticipated. Ann explained that much has been deleted from the plan: crossings, signage, reduced some site sizes, used less gravel, in order to be able to do the contingencies that were appropriate. They also contributed an additional 100K of FS funding and $50K of RAM funds. In January the 2011 funds will be available. Ann disclosed that at this point she doesn’t have a plan to BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 11/16/2010 Notes, Page 2 of 5 request 2011 RAM funds. At this point her intent is to finish the resort and open it in time for the 2011 season. In response to Kim’s question Greta explained that accounting will be available to show how the funds were spent. After much discussion there was consensus to approve the Forest Service request for $50k of RAM funds. RECREATION PLAN / IMPLEMENTATION UPDATES Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (SA 304) Sergio distributed various samples of the safety maps (sizes and background colors). These will be posted at boat access sites and the Visitors’ Center. The maps incorporated suggestions made at the October 19 meeting. Participants reviewed the maps. Suggestions for changes included:  Use turquoise color streams and more of a cobalt blue for the lake. It might make it easier to see where the roads come up to the lake shore. Park Creek – road needs to come all the way to the end of the lake.  Show the Baker Lake Trail.  Show some minor trails from Baker Lake Trail to Noisy Creek dispersed and Anderson.  Differentiate the streams coming in – extend them out a ways so you can see they cross the road and change them to a color denoting they are a stream (vs. a long inlet)  Boulder Creek Stream needs to be moved to its correct location.  Change “respect” to “help” Wildlife and Lands  Get a picture with the proper “stump quotient”  Add more no wake buoys – full circle surrounding the loon platform? This would make it easier to enforce. If we use metrics, need to use yards instead of meters.  Add Baker Lake Trail, other key references (Ann will help). Draft Aesthetics Management Plan (SA 302) Scott and Jamie worked together to integrate feedback from the last RRG meeting into the plan. Funds will be available to do the screening in 2013. Cary asked if PSE Security folks have reviewed this plan. Pam will resend the drawings to this department and follow up with a phone call to discuss. They said they just don’t want anything in front of their cameras. Screening was minimized before operator houses so they can see what is going on. The PSE Risk and Claims Department has also reviewed this plan. The Dam Safety folks have also reviewed this plan. Concern: There are quite a few Douglas Fir in front of Gate 3. Should it be kept open? It was agreed that the spacing has been approved and that the species are appropriate and should do well. From the Power Facility, the operators need to be able to do a visual check of West Pass Dike and Depression Lake. We may need to re-evaluate the number of fir trees. We may want to make a break there to afford a view of the mountain as well as the dam and dike. Next steps: Develop an Implementation Plan that will also include a Lower Baker Plan. 2009 Draft Annual Reports Pam said the 60-day review of the Annual Recreation Report (Article 301) will begin the end of 2010. All have received the draft report. Comments have been received and responses are complete and to the PSE BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 11/16/2010 Notes, Page 3 of 5 tech writer for final edits. This Report will be a summary document that appends all final reports for the articles with comments enclosed. Written comments will be due the end of February, 2011. Pam is working with Ann on swim delineation and hoping to incorporate it with Horse Shoe Cove work drawdown. We will stay in close contact regarding the cultural aspects of Horse Shoe Cove work. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 11/16/2010 Notes, Page 4 of 5 FEBRUARY 15, 2011 RRG MEETING TOPICS TO INCLUDE  BRCC Update  Update on Water Safety and Aesthetics Plans  Update on Swift Creek Campground Schedule  Status of Annual Reports  Bulletin Board Teamlet Report  Prep for LEP Meeting (which will immediately follow RRG)  Other Topics?  Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS  October 19, 2010 RRG and LEP draft notes (revised)  November 16, 2010 RRG Agenda  Forest Service Justification for use of 2010 RAM Funds: 1/11/10: Request Decision November 16  Updated Schematics for Aesthetics Screening of Upper Baker Dam facility areas.  Revised draft Water Safety Tear Sheets MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  Food was much appreciated  Field trip was very informative – Thanks Ann! Do Differently:  Start on time  End on time  Better weather BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 11/16/2010 Notes, Page 5 of 5  