Meeting Notes September 29, 2010 / 10:00 a.m. <ad> Noon / Sauk Conference Room, Burlington  Baker River Project License Implementation    Cultural Technical Meeting FINAL Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE), (425) 462-3609, elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com.  PRESENT Elizabeth Dubreuil, Cary Feldmann, Mark Killgore (Puget Sound Energy), Heather Miller (HRA), Julie Stanaszek (Montgomery, Watson, Harza), Candace Wilson and Lyn Wiltse (Facilitators, PDSA Consulting). By phone: Chris Miss (Northwest Archeological Associates), Russell Holter (Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation), and Aaron Naumann (USACE).  DECISIONS: None today  NEXT MEETING: October 12 or 13, 10 a.m. <ad> 2 p.m., SHPO Office, Olympia  2010 MEETING DATES: November 17, December 15  SEPTEMBER 29 AGENDA 1. Review notes / agenda / action items for August 18, 2010 meeting 2. Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates? 3. Decisions Required at Today's Meeting: None 4. HPMP Update 5. Lower Baker Dam Improvement Project Presentation by PSE, HRA, and MWH --Discussion of potential effects and determination if possible Lunch 6. Project Updates  LB Powerhouse LB FSC Stabilization Other? 7. Decisions for next meeting? 8. Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting  NEW ACTION ITEMS Elizabeth: Issue invitation for last chance to see LB Dam Overtopping Project Presentation on October 12 or 13 at SHPO to CRAG members.  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS   Elizabeth and NWAA: Revise APE to include historic district resources for LB FSC and distribute  to CRAG with narrative description. Ongoing.   Jan:  Share survey results on FS 1106 project with CRAG (2nd phase). Keep this?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 9/29/10 Notes, Page 1 of 5    Meeting Notes September 29, 2010 / 10:00 a.m. <ad> Noon / Sauk Conference Room, Burlington   Elizabeth: Proceed with curation of collections at the Burke by 9/30/10 with Burke and NWAA.  Ongoing. Note: HIT agreement with Burke is being reviewed by PSE Contracts Dept.   NWAA: Prepare collections for curation at Burke by end of September. (Due to FS change in  schedule, the collection may not be submitted to the Burke until the end of the year. Ongoing.   All:  Discuss best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential  archaeological information. We can put limitations on who can access Baker documents. Suggest  deleting since beyond scope of control.   Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating  to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.) Pending. Jessie will email spread sheet of all  referenced documents and reports to Elizabeth by end of August.   All:  Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. Under  consideration.  REVIEW NOTES / AGENDA / ACTION ITEMS Review of notes and action items was deferred as most CRAG members were not present.  BRCC ACTIVITIES Report of BRCC activities was deferred as most CRAG members were not present.  HPMP UPDATE Elizabeth reported that the HPMP was filed, and we are awaiting approval by FERC. Members will receive a copy.  LOWER BAKER DAM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT PRESENTATION Elizabeth, Mark Killgore, Julie Stanaszek of Montgomery, Watson, Harza (MWH) and Heather Miller of Historical Research Associates (HRA) gave a presentation on the proposed Lower Baker Dam Improvement Project.  Mark gave a brief overview of the dam project, the purpose of which is to provide safe passage of a flood event, protect the dam abutments, and protect sensitive equipment. FERC requires a safety inspection of the dam every five years by an independent party. The dam is now 80 years old, and is beginning a new 50-year license.  Montgomery Watson Harza has conducted an inspection and prepared a feasibility study with a recommendation that includes prevention of overtopping of abutments during PMF, moving of critical equipment, and automation of spillway gates. The recommendation will also bring the dam to OSHA standards and will improve operations and security.  Consultation within PSE has taken place, and external consultation is beginning. Russ clarified that this project is separate from the LB Powerhouse and noted that the Powerhouse is partly in the historic district, so it would have an effect. Elizabeth noted that the Powerhouse was not a contributing resource in the historic district and it does not meet the period of significance for the historic district.  Julie gave a brief background of the work to this point and outlined design features, which include increasing the height of the abutments, widening spillways, and making changes to spillway gate specifications. It is  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 9/29/10 Notes, Page 2 of 5    Meeting Notes September 29, 2010 / 10:00 a.m. <ad> Noon / Sauk Conference Room, Burlington  proposed that ten of the 23 existing spillway gates be removed resulting in ten 21' gates, with 3 gates in the center to remain as is to preserve their historical context along with the ski jump.  Russ noted the spill gate profile seems altered. Julie explained that the plan is to build frames on the dam side and extend the pier noses. The crest would be resurfaced the same as it is now. The gate door will be moved upstream.  Russ asked about the existing gates. They are mostly steel, four are timber.  Russ asked about the look of the new gate. It will be very similar with a larger frame mounted on the upstream gate opening.  Timeline for the project is design/engineering through most of 2011, and construction over three non-flood seasons 2012 <ad> 2014.  Heather reviewed the dam's construction history. Elizabeth reviewed the location of all the structures on the view shed from lookout. Heather outlined other components of the plan. The existing generator building, transfer station and shed will be replaced, and the existing structures will be moved. The intake grade will be raised.  The project is in the Baker River Hydroelectric Development Historic District. No eligible archaeological sites are within one mile of the dam. Contributing resources and character-defining features were reviewed. Heather shared findings; the recommendation is for no adverse effect.  LUNCH <ad> We had our usual working lunch.  LB Dam Project Presentation, continued Russ raised a question about the gatehouse. It will not move, though access will change. Russ noted that the abutment extension will block much of the gatehouse from view on the downstream side. Photos and photo simulations were studied.  There was brief discussion of the gate car. The old gate car was mitigated, and the new one was fabricated in 2007-2008. It was intended as an interim measure pending automation of the gates, which is included in this project.  Russ said he would like to hear input from other CRAG members and discuss the project with SHPO colleagues. He is concerned that other parties may have other recommendations or questions and sees his role as concurrence. He raised a question as to whether effects were being minimized/mitigated or whether there is no effect.  Elizabeth noted that much of the information is NERC Critical Energy Infrastructure Information (CEII) and cannot be distributed. Elizabeth noted that under the HPMP consulting parties have the responsibility to weigh in, with a formal consultation letter as the final piece. This meeting was arranged especially to accommodate people's schedules so they could be present for the presentation. Elizabeth noted that she continues to consult on an ongoing basis with tribal consulting parties who, in general, have limited interest in the built environment.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 9/29/10 Notes, Page 3 of 5    Meeting Notes September 29, 2010 / 10:00 a.m. <ad> Noon / Sauk Conference Room, Burlington  It was suggested that the presentation be given one more time at SHPO's office in Olympia with invitations to other CRAG members to attend in person or by WebEx. Russ, Greg, Steve, and Rob at SHPO are requested to be present.  Russ agreed that under the HPMP, FERC delegates oversight of the process to PSE. He noted that he has seen situations in which parties were disenfranchised from consultation with disastrous results. He shared that he does not think that is the case here. He feels his role is to make sure that does not happen.   ACTION: Elizabeth will issue last chance invitation to see LB Dam Overtopping Project Presentation on October 12 or 13 at SHPO to CRAG members.  Heather will make some improvements to the presentation.  PROJECT UPDATES LB Powerhouse <ad> No responses were received from CRAG members, only SHPO. The information was sent to FERC, and we are waiting for a response.  LB FSC <ad> CRAG held a presentation on the FSC earlier. Northwest Archaeological Associates has done additional surveys and will make a presentation of findings, and an updated APE by the next meeting in November. The Cal Portland property will not be used, and use of PSE property is being redesigned. Elizabeth and Chris will present the information to Rob Whitlam and discuss the archaeological elements to alleviate some of the technical difficulties with seeing this for the first time in the November meeting.  The FSC will be built at the location of the old boat launch, making it inaccessible to the public. A temporary boat launch will be built early next year for public use. Elizabeth suggests phasing the consultation process, since pieces of the plan will be completed at different times. The new FSC is going to be built in 2012-2013. Phase 1 would consist of the new public boat launch construction. Phase 2 would be construction of the FSC, net transition structure, and pier, and Phase 3 would be placing the new FSC in its location on Lake Shannon (disposition of Gulper would also need to be finalized).  Stabilization <ad> Design is complete and on track. Information was sent to CRAG members, and comments have been received from the Forest Service. A permit is needed and the request is in process, using a cover letter that alerts the Corps that the project has been under Corps review during development, which will hopefully streamline permitting. The project will be implemented around March 2011. It may be possible to do inventory as well if pool levels are low enough.  DECISIONS FOR NEXT MEETING: None known  FUTURE MEETINGS The next meeting was scheduled for Oct. 12 or 13 at SHPO, in lieu of the regular CRAG meeting of October 20. The focus of this meeting will be a repeat presentation on the Lower Baker Dam Overtopping Project. Elizabeth will poll CRAG for the best date. A regular CRAG meeting will be held on November 17 to focus on an updated presentation on the Lower Baker FSC project.  EVALUATE MEETING, SET LOCATION AND AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING We suspended the meeting evaluation as this ended up not being an official CRAG meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 9/29/10 Notes, Page 4 of 5    Meeting Notes September 29, 2010 / 10:00 a.m. <ad> Noon / Sauk Conference Room, Burlington  Draft Agenda for October 12 or 13, 2010 Meeting at SHPO, Olympia  10:00 <ad> 11:30 Lower Baker Dam Improvement Project Presentation by PSE, HRA, and MWH  Discussion of potential effects and determination if possible  11:30 <ad> Noon Project Updates   Phasing of Consultation for LB FSC  Noon  Lunch  12:30 <ad> 12:45 Future Meeting Schedule  12:45 <ad> 1:00 HPMP Update  1:00 <ad> 1:30 Review notes / agenda / action items for August 18 & September 29, 2010 meetings  Review recent BRCC meeting activities, licensing updates  (Decisions Required at Today's Meeting: None)  1:30 <ad> 1:45 Decisions for next meeting?  Evaluate Meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (November 17)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 9/29/10 Notes, Page 5 of 5     2010crag20100929.pdf en 