Final Meeting Notes September 2, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. / Snoqualmie, Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation     Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Mel Walters, Cary Feldmann, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Lou Ellyn Jones (USFWS); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Don Gay by phone (USFS); Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS: None today TRIG MEETING DATES: October 7 at Burlington; 11/4, 12/2 NEXT BOTANICAL TEAMLET MEETING: October 6 at Burlington NEXT BRCC MEETING: October 27 being held if needed, location TBD TERM OF THE DAY: “Objective Creep” ACTION ITEMS  Kim & Greta Develop accounting procedures to put left-over Late Seral Forest money into TERF fund  Marty, Kathy, Haley & Scott Update Property X’s pre-acquisition survey with estimated acreages of the various habitat types on the site  Ira Get updated appraisal and timber cruise info for Property X  Ira Coordinate an appraisal and timber cruise for Property G  Tony Coordinate a site visit to Property G for Elk-focused TRIGgers  Stan Email Curt’s contact info to Tony  Marty Accept all changes to date then edit and update the Alder Creek program doc, and send out the latest version prior to the Oct. TRIG meeting PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:  Tony Put a S.A. 514 conversation on the TRIG’s agenda this fall REPORT ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS: Brock reported that WDFW is OK with Property “G” for use as an elk forage property. BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually; October 27 is being held as a possible meeting date (location TBD). Cary noted that all the 2009 annual reports will be compiled and a summary document along with all the reports, comments and responses to comments will be sent out via CD in January. There will be an agency review period and it will all go to FERC in April. Details about the reporting schedule are set out in the tables in S.A. 501. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 9/2/10 Notes, Page 1 of 3    Final Meeting Notes September 2, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. / Snoqualmie, Web-X, Call  TRIG Capital Budget Update Tony distributed a spreadsheet Will and Kim put together that shows the current and scheduled capital funds for articles 502, 503, 504 and 505. It also showed the expenses to date from the Elk acquisition fund. At this time, $1,503,882 remains in the Elk land acquisition fund. Tony reminded folks that the Forest and Wetland articles will reimburse the Elk fund for their portions of the Alder Creek acquisition. The Forest article will deposit $60k into the Elk fund next year and the Wetland article will contribute $280k when that article gets funded in year 4 (2012). Late Seral Forest Project & TERF Don reported that the thinning work related to the Late Seral Forest article is underway and scheduled to be completed in November. It was a favorable bid climate, and there will be $25k-$30k left over when the project is complete. USFS proposes using some of this money to monitor the area. After discussion of the proposal and the correct process to follow, TRIG agreed that Kim and Greta will work together on the accounting process for putting this into the TERF fund. USFS could then bring the proposal forward for the TRIG to consider and Tony would cue up a TRIG decision to allocate funding from TERF. It was agreed that this could be done in time to allow monitoring to begin next summer if approved by TRIG. ACQUISITION UPDATE Ira updated the TRIG about Property “J” and the challenges related to coordinating with other funders. Ira will keep us informed if anything changes. He also updated the TRIG on the status of his work on other properties. TRIG authorized him to get updated appraisal and timber cruise information for Property X. Marty, Kathy, Haley, and Scott will update the pre-acquisition survey with estimated acreages of the property’s habitat composition. TRIG also authorized an appraisal and timber cruise on Property “G.” Tony will coordinate a site visit for elk-focused TRIGgers. Questions? Ask Tony or Ira. BOTANICAL TEAMLET UPDATE Scott showed photos from the site visit he and Kathy took to the Alder Creek property to map Carex comosa. He also reported on the Carex flava site visit he, Tony, Tim Miller (WSU extension agent), Ann Risvold and Kathy Smayda took to the NE end of Baker Lake. There were no seedlings observed, but they did see most of the previously identified plants (362 total plants in last survey). They also identified areas where Reed Canary Grass is most dense around the Carex flava plants with the idea of treating Reed Canary Grass in these areas in order to reduce competition with Carex flava. Scott also showed photos of the ivy removal work at Baker’s old spawning beaches and there was celebration around the table. The next Botanical Teamlet meeting is scheduled for October 6. OSPREY UPDATE Mel reported on the work that is under way to create Osprey nest trees. He showed photos of the completed work at sites 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, and 13. The invoice for these six sites is $8k. He will invite the contractors to a future TRIG meeting to talk more about the project and show a video of their work. Osprey surveys: There were 4 active nest sites on Lake Shannon and a non-breeding pair that Mel thinks will likely breed next year. There were 3 total active nests on Baker Lake. EAGLE SURVEYS Haley reported that the bald eagle night roost surveys start again in November. TRIG will talk about the protocol at the October meeting. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 9/2/10 Notes, Page 2 of 3    Final Meeting Notes September 2, 2010 / 9 a.m. – 3 p.m. / Snoqualmie, Web-X, Call  ALDER CREEK MANAGEMENT: GATES The gates TRIG approved at the last meeting to control access to the Alder Creek property will cost approximately $22K (3 gates and 15- 20 ecology blocks), and the work will begin in September. Elizabeth (PSE) conducted a cultural review of the sites and PSE is not expecting there to be any issues. ALDER CREEK PROGRAM DOCUMENT The 8/31 version Marty emailed out includes the edits and comments to date. Tony projected the document and Marty led the TRIG through a review. Edits were made real-time and the group made it through Management Unit 4. Wetland buffers TRIG discussed what would be allowed or prohibited within the 300’ TRIG-designated buffer on the north side of the wetland in polygon 2. In addition to maintaining compliance with DNR Forest Practice Rules, TRIG agreed that any additional activity within this area would be to protect or enhance habitat for pondbreeding amphibians, neo-migrating birds, or overall wetland function. On the south side of this same wetland, maintaining slope stability will be a guiding factor. TRIG affirmed that the remaining, smaller wetlands on this property will be subject to DNR Forest Practices Rules, but were not called out for any additional TRIG-designated buffer. Monitoring TRIG clarified and agreed that compliance monitoring relates to determining whether we are doing what we’re required to do and efficiency monitoring relates to determining how well the methods chosen are achieving the desired results. Marty will draft text for sections 5.2 and 5.3 and work with Cary to ensure it is consistent with article 501. Next Steps Prior to the October TRIG meeting, Marty will accept all changes to date and send the document out one more time (only today’s edits and the content he has been asked to add will show in the track changes). MEETING EVALUATION  Call, Web-X working well  Good room  Good facilitation  When meeting in Snoqualmie, keep the Burlington video option available if possible  Traffic  Draft October 7 Agenda  Alder Creek Management Program Doc  Acquisition Update, Property “G” and “X”  Eagle Survey protocols  Botanical Teamlet Update  Funding proposal re: Osprey tree work  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 9/2/10 Notes, Page 3 of 3     2010trig20100902.pdf en 