Final Meeting Notes May 6, 2010 / 9 a.m. <ad> 10 a.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation    Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Cary Feldmann, Haley Edwards, and Ira McDaniel (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Bob Nelson and Bill Richardson by phone (RMEF); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Don Gay (USFS); Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA). DECISIONS: None today TRIG MEETINGS: June 3 (TRIG & ARHWG at Burlington), 7/1, 8/5, 9/2, 10/7, 11/4, 12/2 NEXT BRCC MEETING: June 8 (w/ ARG) at Baker Lake ACTION ITEMS Tony Bring estimated costs for Ira / RMEF's time to next TRIG meeting Tony Send an email to TRIGgers, inviting folks to identify the resource areas they are most interested in and form teamlets accordingly (these teamlets will identify resource-specific interests and objectives in prep for the TRIG's work on the site-specific plan for Alder Creek) Marty Let Tony know who will be the lead for the Forest teamlet (re: planning for Alder Creek) Tony Forward Bill's video to the TRIG Tony Add reminder to avoid chemicals (colognes, etc) to the TRIG's agenda template PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS: Tony Work w/ Ira and Ray to merge your respective lists of possible alternative properties Report on previous action items: Tony reported PSE has put a "Baker lock" on the access road to the Alder Creek property. Keys are available at the Baker and Burlington PSE offices. Please remember that Tony must record each use of the road in order to share the maintenance costs with DNR, so coordinate any TRIG-related visits to the site with him. BRCC / Licensing Update PSE provides monthly email updates on Working Group activities to members of the BRCC. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. They are anticipating in-person meetings semi-annually. The BRCC didn't meet in May; the next in-person BRCC meeting will be June 8 with the ARG and held at Baker. Cary pointed out that the lodge is available for those who would like to come up the night before. Good news! FERC accepted the TRMP (Article 501 and all its appendices, i.e., all of the terrestrial article plans) and Article 410 without changes ... paving the way for us to move forward with site-specific plans.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 5/6/10 Notes, Page 1 of 2    Final Meeting Notes May 6, 2010 / 9 a.m. <ad> 10 a.m. / Burlington plus Web-X, Call  The initial comment period is over for the first batch of draft annual reports. The next set of drafts will be out the end of July for formal review. Alder Creek Mapping Update A recent two-day mapping field trip was focused on the habitat breaks related to wetlands and slopes. Assessments were based on soil composition, plant species, and hydrology. Joetta digitized the information gathered during the field trip and Tony projected the updated image so that those who were at the site could describe what they found. They found several areas that are already conducive to management for elk. In particular, there is a fairly large section on the south side of the western parcel that is generally level with young, small trees. There are also several areas in the eastern parcel that are already grass, including a non-wetland pasture that is currently getting heavy elk use, and there are other areas that just need to have the canopy opened up. Bill (RMEF) thinks this should be done soon (the sooner, the easier). Site-specific Management Plan Don noted that this baseline sets us up well for developing the site-specific management plans. He suggested that an efficient way to do this could be for folks interested in a particular resource area (elk, deciduous forest, and wetland) get together in teamlets to identify their specific interests and objectives for the property in advance of the TRIG's planning work. Don volunteered to be a lead contact for folks interested in Elk; Brock took Wetlands; and Marty took Forest issues (with the hope of finding another volunteer to take it on). Tony will send out an invitation to TRIGgers to join the teamlets as their interest leads them. Land Acquisition Plan Ray, Tony, Ira, and Bill met yesterday to talk about the best approach for the TRIG's land search process. Bill recommended a small-scale, ongoing search process that would entail 1-2 days per month of Ira's and Ray's time. He noted that, for our goals, it is especially important to be patient and to focus on building relationships. Their proposal is to maintain the RMEF contract for 2 days/month of Ray's time and set aside funding for 1-2 days / month of Ira's time. Tony will bring details, including cost, to the June 3 TRIG meeting. "Goose" Update Evidently, geese appreciate our work to provide suitable nesting locations in the Baker basin. In addition to nesting on a few of the Osprey artificial nests (as reported last month), they are also nesting on two of the three loon platforms. Haley will monitor, research options, and update the TRIG June 3. Draft June 3 Agenda 9 am <ad> Noon, Burlington PSE Office (ARHWG to follow)  Alder Creek Management Program Doc (incl. Legacy Wood) Land Search Process <ad> Report on Cost Estimates Possible Properties Botanical Teamlet Update Loon / Osprey Update (Geese, too)  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Final 5/6/10 Notes, Page 2 of 2     2010trig20100506.pdf en 