Final Meeting Notes March 18, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation     Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Alder Creek Teamlet Final Meeting Notes March 18, 2010 ~ 9:00 am - 12:00 pm PSE Skagit Room Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, and Scott Heller (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); by phone: Don Gay (USFS), Brock Applegate (WDFW), Joetta Zablotney (R2), and Chris Madsen (NWIFC). NEXT TRIG MEETING: April 1, 2010 NEXT ELK TEAMLET MEETING: to be determined NEW ACTION ITEMS  Joetta- Provide Tony a list of points to be GPS’d in the field to confirm alignment of the orthophoto with property corners. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All Bring examples of similar plans for other projects to use as a guide for completing our implementation plan  Joetta and Kim - Enter Alder Creek into project boundary and submit new FERC drawing  Joetta - Publish ortho photos with polygons to PDF  Joetta - Make mapping and metadata available to the TRIG LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE: Alder Creek: The signed road easement was received from DNR. Ira provided Joetta a copy; Joetta noted that the easement is described in terms of roads and offsets rather than metes and bounds. POST ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES The teamlet reviewed the new orthophoto map showing the parcel boundaries. The alignment will be field verified and cover type boundaries and features will be added to develop a base map for the property. Don raised the topic of wetland buffers and their purpose. He suggested that the group consider which proposed activities are appropriate and within what distance of each wetland to determine if BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 3/18/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Final Meeting Notes March 18, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  there are any specific provisions for proposed management activities. Don also noted that while we need to identify primary goals for each management area, there are other goals independent of the three license article funding sources (elk forage, deciduous forest, wetlands), that the teamlet may want to work toward. Tony reviewed the meeting notes for the August 24, 2009 Elk Teamlet conference call regarding wetland buffers. The notes indicated that the parties agreed to the property purchase based on a 300-foot buffer being provided on wetlands. The discussion section of the notes clarified that the 300-foot buffer would be applied to the large wetland complex in the western parcel (polygons 4, 6, and 8). The group reviewed the polygons using the following approach: First, the group proposed a management ‘emphasis’ for each numbered polygon (representing a preliminary management area or unit) based on the three primary management goals: elk forage, wetlands for pond breeding amphibians, deciduous forest for avian species. Then, the teamlet considered secondary or subgoals for each polygon. The following secondary goals were identified; these may apply to any given management unit, as required to comply with law and/or as desired where not in conflict with primary management emphasis:  Legacy wood (License Article 511)  Threatened and endangered species (License Article 410)  Noxious weeds (License Article 508)  Plants of special status (License Article 509)  Cultural resources programmatic agreement  Sensitive areas  SOSEA (compliance with current Forest Practice Rules) The teamlet agreed that none of the management units would be assigned a goal of commercial timber harvest solely for the purpose of revenue generation; any timber harvest conducted would be primarily for the purpose of habitat modification relative to another goal, such as elk forage enhancement. Summary of Goals for each Polygon Western Polygons Polygon 2  Primary emphases: protect wetland buffer and deciduous forest habitat  Identify opportunities to enhance deciduous forest for avian species (for example, by increasing plant species diversity and/or increasing amount of cottonwood)  Identify opportunities for elk forage enhancement greater than 300 feet from wetland boundary on north side of wetland polygons 4, 6, and 8. BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 3/18/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4    Final Meeting Notes March 18, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  Polygons 4, 6, and 8 (wetlands in western parcel)  Primary emphasis: protect wetland functions (maintain full 300-foot, no cut buffer along northern boundary of wetlands to encompass deciduous forest habitat for avian species; buffer other sides of wetlands adequately to protect wetland functions)  Identify amphibian habitat enhancement options (no additional wetland creation anticipated) Polygon 5  Primary emphasis: elk forage enhancement (outside of wetland buffer)  Determine necessary width of buffer to protect wetland 4 and 6, based on concerns about slope stability and erosion control; maintain and protect buffer  Identify opportunities for legacy wood enhancement where consistent with elk forage management  Consider visual screen along south boundary to protect from possible future DNR harvest Polygon 3  Primary emphasis to be determined based on field review to determine wetland presence; either wetland emphasis or deciduous forest emphasis Polygon 10  Primary emphasis to be determined. Possible elk forage and/or legacy wood, but may be located on unstable/highly erodible or inaccessible slopes Eastern Polygons Polygons 11, 12, and 13  Primary emphasis elk forage  Protect existing wetlands, if present, through compliance with FPA regulations for harvest  Consider visual screening from road along south side of Polygon 12  Southwest corner of Polygon 11 (south of road): identify opportunities for elk forage enhancement; otherwise, manage for legacy wood Polygon 14  Primary emphasis elk forage  Protect existing wetlands, if present, through compliance with FPA regulations for harvest  Identify opportunities for forage enhancement such as canopy thinning, understory mowing  Identify opportunities for amphibian habitat protection and/or enhancement  Weed management (a Class B-designate weed known in this polygon) Polygon 15 BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 3/18/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4    Final Meeting Notes March 18, 2010 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call     Primary emphasis to be determined, possible elk forage enhancement Determine why this site not included in recent harvest  Polygon 16  Primary emphasis deciduous forest habitat Review of draft Annotated Outline of the Alder Creek Property Management Program The teamlet reviewed comments on the draft outline and agreed to revised approach to be used in next draft regarding goals and objectives, multiple goals, and acreage targets. Next Steps Tony proposed that a high level wetlands mapping of the property be conducted beginning in April. Prior to the field work, preliminary covertype boundaries will be identified on the new orthophoto base map and digitized. The wetland polygons will be verified/refined in the field, other covertypes and site features added, property corners GPS’d, and a detailed draft base map will then be made available for the teamlet to use in refining management units. Next Teamlet meeting TBD  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group  Final 3/18/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2010trig_alder20100318.pdf en 