Final LEP Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 / 12:00 p.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m.  Baker River Project License Implementation Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010 12:30 pm -3:00 pm PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington DRAFT MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com)-360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Pam Garland, Mark Killgore, and Elizabeth Dubriel (by phone), (PSE); Sergio Capozzi by phone (AECOM); Jon Vanderheyden, Ann Dunphy, Carol Gladsjo, John Klassen, and Jeff Roundy (USFS); Worth Allen, and Brock Applegate (WDFW); Jeff Turner (Whatcom County); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT MEETING DATE No date has been set. Pam will send out notification depending on the outcome of the funding discussions set to occur on February 26, 2010. ACTION ITEMS Sergio <ad> By end of February, update the LEP Management Plan and send it out by the end of the month to trigger the final 30 day review. Pam <ad> Check with PSE re use of equipment purchased with LEP funds outside of project area. Are there any limitations from PSE's standpoint and if so what are they? Pam <ad> During the first week of March, set up conference call with Jeff, Worth, Brock, Bill Heinck, Bill Hebner, and Jeremy to come to consensus on priorities for first year wish list to support law enforcement. Primary focus should be the Baker Project area. Pam <ad> Send out list of priorities (and supporting data where it exists) for funding for all to flesh out to the extent possible and use as a basis for funding discussions / decisions. Mark <ad> Get EAP info from Miriam and pass it on to Sergio.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 2   DRAFT LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN This plan must be submitted to FERC by October of this year. As Sergio walked us through the plan he explained that it had not changed much since our previous review. The main difference is that he created a section for supplemental materials to take the place of appendices and attachments (Section 8). He explained that Section 8.3 outlines the annual communication and coordination process. We reviewed what the annual plan would look like. The plan would be reviewed by all responsible parties and edited on an annual basis. The outline follows the general implementation plan template that PSE is using for their management plans. He noted that Section 5 begins the annual input piece of the plan to capture lessons learned. Section 6 is for implementation procedures. There was concern about what might be an unnecessary level of detail in the management plan. Sergio will make the suggested edits and get the plan out for review. IMPLEMENTATION PLAN Sergio explained that the current version of this plan includes the feedback received at the October LEP and November LEP teamlet meetings. It also matches the headings in the Management Plan. Some of the initial sections of the plan are not likely to change from year to year. The rest of the implementation plan will be reviewed and revised on an annual basis. Section 3 is the process by which this plan will be developed on an annual basis. It lays out the six tasks for creating the new version of the Law Enforcement Implementation Plan. We want to sort out the funding and also list some long-term as well as short-term priorities. We will deemphasize the elements that are likely in other plans. There was a discussion about finishing the Law Enforcement plan and getting it out for review by the end of February so that the $44,000 (2009 and 2010) of PSE law enforcement funding could be available to fund the Whatcom County and WDFW requests in April, ie. early enough for use this season. The LE teamlet needed to prioritize the first year needs from the LE wish list. HANDOUTS February 16, 2010 LEP Meeting Agenda Final LEP Meeting Notes from October 20, 2009 and November 30, 2009  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 16, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 2    2010-02-16_LEP_FinalNotes.pdf en 