Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation    Cultural Resource Advisory Group FINAL Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE), (425) 462-3609, elizabeth.dubreuil@pse.com.  PRESENT: Elizabeth Dubreuil (Puget Sound Energy), Jan Hollenbeck (United States Forest Service), Ron Kent (USACE), Jessie Piper (Northwest Archeological Associates) and Candace Wilson (Facilitator, PDSA Consulting). Attending by Phone: Rob Whitlam (Department of Archaeology & Historic Preservation).  DECISIONS: None today  NEXT MEETING: February 17 <ad> HPMP Discussion (PSE Skagit Center, Burlington)  2010 MEETING DATES: February 17, March 17, April 21, May 19, June 16, July 21, August 18, September 15, October 20, November 17, December 15  JANUARY 27 AGENDA 1. Review notes/agenda/action items from January 6 and January 20, 2010 meeting. 2. Decisions today? No 3. HPMP Revision Update Discussion of Section 5 Revisit pg. 154: NFS Lands Revisit pg. 154: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines & Archaeological Treatment Plan Revisit Sections 5.3.2 Para. 2 re CRC qualification/professional archaeologist Revisit 5.3.5 Intro & Monitoring Program Review Monitoring form and revisit 5.3.5 "Archaeological Sites" when revised Review 6.3 Reporting Review Curation Plan Further discussion of unresolved areas listed in Comments Log Other issues? Next steps 4. Decisions for next meeting: None known 5. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting (February ___, 2010)  NEW ACTION ITEMS Elizabeth Check wording of 2002 amendment to NHPA regarding qualifications for person acting for agency and making determinations, such as for APE and eligibility Elizabeth/Jessie Revise HPMP language to make consistent regarding qualifications to make specific determinations, in accordance with NHPA qualifications, e.g. in the event the CRC is not a  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 1 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  professional architect   Elizabeth/Jessie Add statement to section on CRC qualifications, if necessary, to cover professionals  to meet Security of Interior guidelines   Jan  Provide copy of "Hold in Trust" Agreement for curation at the Burke to Elizabeth   Elizabeth Proceed with curation of collections at the Burke by 9/30/10 with Burke and NWAA   NWAA Prepare collections for curation at Burke by 9/30/10   Elizabeth Rework Historic Structures section of Section 5 and email to CRAG members.   Jessie Clean up Contractor Compliance and draft appendix with special provision language for  contracts for construction and field work for the HPMP and send to Elizabeth   Elizabeth Rework Curation Plan in Section 5 of the HPMP and develop new appendix with HIT  Agreements and Burke Guidelines.   Jessie Write language to support CRAG's interest in including I&E in projects for Training and  Education section in the HPMP, Section 5   All  Complete action items and send new language/sections out to CRAG members by Feb. 8   Elizabeth Send up to date Section 5 of the HPMP to all CRAG members.  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS   Jan  Provide agency letter stating more time needed for comments in the HPMP process.  Pending   Elizabeth Rework Maintenance Guidelines section of the HPMP (pg. 154) to be more specific. In  process..   All  Determine placement of CRC/professional archaeologist proviso <ad> should it be introduced at  specific locations in the HPMP or included in the CRC qualifications in section 6? In process   All  Review HPMP Section 1.5 on Confidentiality Pending   All:  Determine best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential  archaeological information.   Elizabeth: Follow up with Forest Service on Protective Options project. In process   Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating  to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.) Pending   Heather: Collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a  DOE schedule. In process.   All?  Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. Ongoing  REVIEW NOTES/AGENDA/ACTION ITEMS: Notes Revised notes from the January 6 and January 20 CRAG meetings were accepted as presented. Candace will send final notes to everyone.  Agenda The agenda was reviewed and accepted with no changes.  Report on Action Items   Jan  Provide agency letter stating more time needed for comments in the HPMP process.  Pending   Jan/Jessie Rework NFS section of the HPMP (pg. 154). Completed   Jessie Send Tables 4.1 Proposed Actions and 4.2 Excluded License Articles to Jan Completed  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 2 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call   Elizabeth Rework Maintenance Guidelines section of the HPMP (pg. 154) to be more specific. In  process. See below.   Elizabeth Review NHPA for specifics on qualifications/determinations of Cultural resources  Coordinator. Completed. New action items were formed on this topic.   All  Determine placement of CRC/professional archaeologist proviso <ad> should it be introduced at  specific locations in the HPMP or included in the CRC qualifications in section 6? In process. See  below.   Jessie Rework 5.3.5 Introduction and "Monitoring Program" to make it more inclusive of all  cultural resources. Completed   Elizabeth Investigate holding a 2010 CRAG meeting at Baker Lodge or Scott's office. Completed See  below.   Ron  Provide CRAG a copy of the Corps Standard Operating Procedures Appendix D on  emergencies Completed   Elizabeth Research whether additional curation is needed for PSE engineered drawings Completed   Ron  Provide language for Corps permit letter. Completed. See below.   Elizabeth Send Section 5 of the HPMP to CRAG members <ad> Completed   All  Review HPMP Section 1.5 on Confidentiality Pending   Elizabeth Consult with Tribes and Forest Service regarding confidentiality. The Tribes have not  offered more on the wording on confidentiality in the HPMP. Completed   All:  Determine best action regarding potential issue with WISAARD access to confidential  archaeological information.   Elizabeth: Follow up with Forest Service on Protective Options project. In process   Chris: Create structure of documents record. (This refers to a reference index of documents relating  to CRAG indicating the date of the latest version.) Pending   Chris: Contact the USACE Lawr Salo as a possible resource for this team. Dropped   Kelly: Send Elizabeth some scenarios to use as examples in portraying decision and quorum rules  for CRAG over the life of the license. Dropped   Kelly: Provide drawings of three treatment options for next meeting. Completed   Elizabeth: Check to see if 2009 CRAG notes are posted on the website and send link to group.  Finalized notes are being posted on the PSE website. The FTP site is working, but Elizabeth cannot  view items currently due to an IT issue. Completed   Elizabeth: Look at curation protocols. Completed New action items were formed around completing  curation with the Burke 9/30/10. See below.   Elizabeth: Draft a description of documentation for CRAG to review, for insertion into the Baker  Master Plan, so that it is part of PSE's process to consider with every project. Dropped. There is no  Master Plan any more.   Heather: Collect data for a new table for those buildings that have not been evaluated, and include a  DOE schedule. In process.   Elizabeth: See if the Museum newspaper project can be added to the Master Plan. Dropped. See below   All?  Present findings from Treatment Plan collection at a professional conference. Ongoing  FOLLOW-UP ON ACTION ITEMS HPMP Language about CRC qualifications This was discussed again. Elizabeth will add language to ensure qualifications are met for making determinations. New actions were added. ACTION: Elizabeth Check wording of 2002 amendment to NHPA regarding qualifications for person  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 3 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  acting for agency and making determinations, such as for APE and eligibility ACTION: Elizabeth/Jessie Revise HPMP language to make consistent regarding qualifications to make specific determinations, in accordance with NHPA qualifications, e.g. in the event the CRC is not a professional architect ACTION: Elizabeth/Jessie Add statement to section on CRC qualifications, if necessary, to cover professionals to meet Security of Interior guidelines  Rework Maintenance Guidelines Elizabeth will meet with Heather on 1/28 to get more specifics for this section. She will email the reworked section out to CRAG members.  Meetings at Baker Lodge/Scott's Office This item was initiated as a means to attract more attendance at CRAG meetings, but after discussion, it was determined that changing location is unlikely to make a difference and increases travel distance for the regular attendees.  Corps Permits The Corps decided the streamlined process for granting permits will satisfy the Corps Section 106 responsibility. The only concern is that the Tribes understand there is only one opportunity to comment. Elizabeth will discuss this with the Tribes to make sure they understand that the PA and HPMP satisfy the governmental responsibility for Section 106. In these cases (about 1 per year or less), the Corps permit will follow the HPMP process. Due to the small number of permits, no formal letter identifying a lead agency will be completed. At the time of the project, the cover letter will describe the process and lead.  Curation Jan asked about the status of NWAA analysis of the collections. Jessie reported that analysis has not been completed because 2009 collection/monitoring could not be completed due to water levels. Elizabeth reported there is funding for this year if all parties want curation completed this year. Elizabeth has been in contact with the Burke Museum to arrange for curation. Costs are $312 set up per box or $250 per 5 linear inches, and $68 per year. CRAG decided to complete curation by 9/30/10. This would be added to each year. There are 5 boxes as of last year, 4 of which are from Forest Service lands at Baker Lake, and 1 box from Lake Shannon. There are also 2 boxes of documentation. There was discussion of what needs to be in the HIT Agreements.  ACTION: Jan  Provide copy of "Hold in Trust" Agreement for curation at the Burke to Elizabeth  ACTION : Elizabeth Proceed with curation of collections at the Burke by 9/30/10 with Burke and NWAA  ACTION: NWAA Prepare collections for curation at Burke by 9/30/10  Museum Newspaper Project Elizabeth reported that the museum is no longer interested in this project because the collection has been scanned. Elizabeth discussed other options with John Boggs and any future agreed to activity will be handled under implementation.  HPMP REVISION UPDATE Section 5.3.5 Intro <ad> Jessie reworked the Introduction to be more inclusive of all resources. CRAG reviewed and accepted the Intro paragraph as revised.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 4 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  Monitoring Program <ad> This section needs to include historic structures as well. Jan asked if the definition of historic properties means they are eligible for the National Register; Jessie indicated that it does.  Jan asked where appropriate intervals are spelled out. They are more specifically outlined in the Maintenance Guidelines and the Archaeological Treatment Plan schedule. References to Appendices F and G were added. The appendix documents can be revised by CRAG at any time without having to be approved by FERC. Revision was made to include effects on known and unknown properties.  Ron asked about lineal features. It is not always possible with testing to avoid inadvertent finds especially with large lineal projects, since testing cannot be performed under levies. Construction monitoring is the only option for those situations.  Historic Structures <ad> Elizabeth plans to meet with Heather on January 28 to get more specifics for this section. She will rewrite it to flow like the Archaeological Sites section. Elizabeth asked for input for what needs to be included in this section. Do we want to add other reports?  ACTION: Elizabeth Rework Historic Structures section of Section 5 and email to CRAG members.  Emergency <ad> This section was reviewed at the last HPMP discussion meeting. Elizabeth needs to check on the language with PSE.  Contractor Compliance <ad> Elizabeth raised concern that the language does not match current practice as it calls for contractors to sign off on full copies of the Unanticipated Discovery Plan (UDP) and Treatment Plan. PSE currently includes special provision language in every contract for field work and construction that communicates to contractors their responsibilities under those plans. Elizabeth trains through tailgate, preconstruction and construction meetings. Issues were discussed, and the paragraph was changed to reflect the practice. An appendix will be created to contain the special provision language.  ACTION: Jessie  Clean up Contractor Compliance and draft appendix with special provision language  for contracts for construction and field work for the HPMP and send to Elizabeth  Physical Protection <ad> There was discussion about whether this topic is needed at this point since it is covered under the Treatment Plan. It was decided to rework the paragraph and to refer to Management Measures and Maintenance Guidelines for information about the topic.  Curation <ad> There was discussion of what to include and how to structure the information in the HPMP. It was decided to create a new appendix for the Hold in Trust agreements and the Burke guidelines so those can be changed if the curation arrangements change. The property owner owns the collection. PSE will need to develop its own HIT with the Burke that meets the specific needs of the collection.  ACTION: Elizabeth Rework Curation Plan in Section 5 of the HPMP and develop new appendix with HIT Agreements and Burke Guidelines.  Training and Education <ad> START HERE - There was discussion of things that need to be included, such as thesis/educational opportunities that might emerge as funds allow. The CRAG originally had its own I&E  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 5 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  Plan, but now Recreation is in charge of I&E. How does CRAG integrate with them on those kinds of projects? Jan raised the concern that there needs to be more language to support CRAG's interest in including I&E in projects. Is there an interpretive plan or is it only funding articles? Jessie suggested adding a statement that indicates I&E will be addressed during project review... "The CRC will coordinate with the team leaders to bring information to the CRAG..." The section seems to be a mixture of public outreach and staff training. Discussion will start with this section at the next meeting.  ACTION: Jessie  Write language to support CRAG's interest in including I&E in projects for Training  and Education section in the HPMP, Section 5.  FUTURE MEETINGS The next meeting of the CRAG to discuss the HPMP will be held on the regular meeting date, February 17, at the Burlington office, starting at 10 a.m.  ACTION: All Complete action items and send new language/sections out to CRAG members by Feb. 8 ACTION: Elizabeth Send up to date Section 5 of the HPMP to all CRAG members.  Elizabeth will coordinate the Lower Baker field trip for another date in February. The next regular meeting of the CRAG will be March 17.  DECISIONS FOR NEXT MEETING: None known EVALUATE MEETING, SET LOCATION AND AGENDA FOR NEXT MEETING (February 17, 2010) Evaluate Meeting:  we made it here good pizza glad to get buy-in Candace's patience everyone's patience Do Differently Jessie's lack of patience!  Draft Agenda for February 17, 2010 Meeting (HPMP Discussion) 1. Review notes/agenda/action items 2. HPMP Revision Update  Check-In on Review Process & Timeline Discussion of Section 5  Start at Training & Education Revisit pg. 154: NFS Lands Revisit pg. 154: Actions under Maintenance Guidelines and Archaeological Treatment Plan Revisit Sections 5.3.2 Para. 2 re CRC qualification/professional archaeologist Review Monitoring form and revisit 5.3.5 "Archaeological Sites" when revised.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 6 of 7    Meeting Notes January 27, 2010 / 9:45 a.m. - Noon / Madrona Rm, Web-X, Call  Review 6.3 Reporting Revisit Contractor Compliance Revisit Curation Plan (HIT Agreements & Burke Guidelines in Appendix L) Further Discussion of Unresolved areas listed in Comments Log Other issues? Next Steps LUNCH 3. Decisions? 4. Evaluate meeting, set location and agenda for next meeting?  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Cultural Resource Advisory Group 1/27/10 Notes, Page 7 of 7     2010crag20100127.pdf en 