Final RRG Meeting Notes April 20, 2010 / 9:30 a.m. <ad> 11:00 a.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA 98233  Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes April 20, 2010 9:00 pm <ad> 12:30 pm  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland and Cary Feldmann (PSE); Ann Dunphy, Jeremy Smith by phone (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) 2010 RRG MEETING DATES June 15, Aug. 17, Oct. 19, Dec. 21 from 9:30 <ad> 2:30. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEW ACTION ITEMS Pam Work with Ann to set dates to work Water Safety Plan implementation actions and send out notification to team members so they may join, if desired. Pam Coordinate PSE response to USFWS re bear resistant trash containers. PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Pam will continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) <ad> ongoing. APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft February 16 RRG meeting notes and the February 26, 2010 RRG conference call notes with minor edits. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that the BRCC last met on March 24 via conference call. The meeting was intended to resolve a lack of consensus regarding a petition for funding by Whatcom County. The request from Whatcom County was for the RRG to distribute $11K of RAM funds for their purchase of equipment listed in a proposal dated February 22, 2010. This decision was not discussed by the BRCC as the petition was withdrawn by Whatcom County. The team leads of the various resource groups provided updates of the license-related activities and answered questions from BRCC members. They also reviewed norms and suggested some edits. The BRCC plans to meet again (face-to-face) on June 8, at the Baker Lake Lodge, (combined with the  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes April 20, 2010  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 3   ARG meeting) and October 27 (location to be determined). BRCC members continue to reserve 9:00 <ad> 11:00 on the mornings of the fourth Wednesday in case a conference call is required to resolve any issues elevated by one of the resource working groups. RECREATION PLAN / IMPLEMENTATION UPDATES Baker Lake Resort Plan (SA 303) Pam reported that we submitted this plan to FERC in October and we are still awaiting their approval. In the meantime, we have begun working on the annual report, due the end of July. The format of this plan will guide that of other plans for reporting to FERC on activities in all of the license articles. The annual report for the 2009 year will be complete in January of 2011. Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Plan (SA 304) FERC approved this plan in January of this year. Currently, Pam is working with Sergio to get the base map for the tear sheet maps. She is getting some GIS maps from Joetta at R2. This article specifies that these tear sheet maps identify recreational opportunities as well as boating and water safety considerations. E.g., identification of no wake zones for wildlife protection. It was suggested we also include information on zebra mussel. These will be posted on the new bulletin boards the Forest Service has constructed. Pam will work on some of the specifics of the maps with Ann and invite others to attend. Draft Aesthetics Management Plan (SA 302) Pam reported that they sent this plan out to RRG members for formal review the end of March and comments are due by April 30. Lower Baker Developed Recreation (SA 305) Pam is keeping in communication with the PMs on the FSC and is also discussing this with Elizabeth Dubreuil (the lead of the Cultural Resource Advisory Group). Law Enforcement Plan (SA 318) This plan was sent out for formal review on April 9 with comments due on May 10. So far, Pam has received a couple review reply forms back; however, there were no comments or suggested edits. Recreation Management Report (SA 301) This plan has been drafted and is very preliminary at this point. Pam, Sergio, and Andy Hunting are working together on the format of this document. RAM Funding Request Discussion Pam reported that the USFS decision request, for 2010 RAM Funding, has been withdrawn due to lack of contractor bid information. It was anticipated that the USFS would have some bid information to bring to this meeting, to provide a cost basis for the BL resort construction. Ann Dunphy reported that the Forest Service is still awaiting bids on the contract. They should be in by the middle of May. At that time she will let Pam know if they will be requesting a decision be made regarding the allocation of RAM funds for the Baker Lake Resort Development. Wildlife Trash Resistant Containers Ann explained that they received an email from USFWS saying they didn't feel that the Biological Opinion was being adequately followed with respect to grizzly bear <ad> relative to overflow trash issues in  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes February 26, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 3   Forest Service campgrounds. The Forest Service developed a proposal dated Feb 4, 2010 in response to this request and as input to PSE as the biological opinion is an agreement between PSE and USFWS. Next step: PSE will utilize the input from the Forest Service in their response to USFWS and give us an update at out next meeting. JUNE 15 RRG MEETING TOPICS BRCC Update Update on Forest Service bids Status of LEP funds Bear Trash Containers Update Cross Resource Issues Discuss Form and Method for Annual Reporting <ad> SA 301 Other Updates? Set August 17 Meeting Agenda for RRG Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS February 16, 2010 notes from RRG Meetings (with edits) February 26, 2010 RRG conference call notes February 20, 2010 Agenda Forest Service Plan for Bear Resistant Trash Containers <ad> February 4, 2010 "Property Owner Wants Road Closed" (Skagit Valley Herald article) by Marta Murvosh MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:  WebEx and conference call Healthy snacks Do Differently: Broader attendance  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes February 26, 2010  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 3    2010-04-20_RRG_FinalNotes.pdf en 