Final Meeting Notes June 3, 2010 / 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. / Burlington plus WebEx, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group FINAL Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Christina VerHeul by phone, Mel Walters, and Ira McDaniels (PSE); Marty Vaughn (Biota-Pacific); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Bill Richardson by phone, and Bob Nelson (RMEF); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC), Don Gay (USFS); Stan Walsh (SRSC); Chris Danilson (Sauk Suiattle Indian Tribe); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA).  DECISIONS: None today  TRIG MEETINGS: July 1 (TRIG & ARHWG at Burlington), 8/5, 9/2, 10/7, 11/4, 12/2 NEXT BRCC MEETING: June 8 (w/ ARG) at Baker Lake  ACTION ITEMS Patrick Work w/ Tony to coordinate NCCC presentation to TRIG Tony Cue up decision re: funding approval for property search process Ira / Ray Contact land owners discussed at this meeting Tony For next mtg, send out Alder Creek map and info about the site's hardwoods 2 weeks ahead Don Email John Cook and Mike Wisdom re: age/density of hardwood relative to elk forage Stan / Chris Report back to TRIG re: preferred road block locations for the Alder Creek property Ira / Tony Connect w/ DNR re: their plan for the road along access points c, d, and e (see below) Brock Contact LouEllyn and draft "straw dog" objectives / interest for wetland polygons, email to Marty / TRIG Marty Send out a new draft of the Program document two weeks before the next TRIG meeting Tony Send Patrick hard copies of the Alder Creek polygon maps  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS: none! Tony Work w/ Ira and Ray to merge your respective lists of possible alternative properties Tony Put a S.A. 514 conversation on the TRIG's agenda this fall  Report on previous action items: Tony brought the cost estimates for Ira (PSE Real Estate) and Ray (RMEF) to continue the search for potential properties. RMEF charges $90/hour on site ($45/hour for travel) and PSE Real Estate charges $60/hour for Ira's time. It costs about $2,800 to have two days of each. The TRIG agreed that this system is working well and is more cost effective than hiring an outside broker to conduct the search on TRIG's behalf. Tony will cue up a decision to memorialize the group's approval of funds for Ira's / RMEF's work.  NCCC presentation Patrick offered to invite someone from the North Cascades Conservation Council to come to the next meeting to give TRIG a short presentation about their proposal to designate the land from Baker Lake east to the current N. Cascades Nat'l Park as more park land. Patrick will work with Tony to coordinate.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 6/3/10 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Final Meeting Notes June 3, 2010 / 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. / Burlington plus WebEx, Call  BRCC / LICENSING UPDATE The BRCC will be meeting next Tuesday at the Baker Lodge w/ ARG. Tours of the new facilities are scheduled for the afternoon.  TRIG Budget Update Christina called in to let the group know that a full budget report will be available at the next TRIG meeting. Tony shared that today is Christina's last day; she and her husband are moving to Nashville. PSE's Will Wharton will step into her role, at least in the interim. TRIG wished Christina well.  LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Alternative Properties Ira provided the TRIG with a brief update on his and Ray's activity since the last meeting. They touched base with the owners of one of our lower-priority properties; the asking price is still too high. Tony shared information about another property near the lake, and the group asked Ira and Ray to make contact with the owners of a different parcel. Want more information? Ask Tony or Ira. There will be a more robust report on possible properties at the next TRIG meeting.  POST ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES, ALDER CREEK PROPERTY Tony noted that the Alder Creek Management Program document is intended to lay out actions that ensure we achieve our goals related to the three articles involved in this property acquisition. Marty reported that comments to date on the draft he sent out have been minor. He asked about the TRIG's preferred approach to the time horizons in this document: year-by-year, two to five years, or the full term of the license. The group agreed by consensus that five years is an appropriate timeframe. The group also agreed that the content should be organized around the desired conditions / outcomes in each polygon, while keeping the prescriptions themselves fairly loose so we can monitor and adjust as needed.  Tony projected the updated polygon maps of the parcels and the group discussed the appropriate primary focus for each (forest / birds, elk, fish / wetland) and the objectives / interests related to each of the focus areas. Marty will incorporate this information into the next draft of the Program document. Highlights:  Elk: Flat to moderate slope (not greater than 22% to maintain ability to bring in equipment) managed for grass / herb meadows and appropriate cover; in non-meadow places, canopy cover less than 20%. Limit vehicle access as much as possible.  Forest / Birds: Avoid cutting down black cottonwood and native willow whenever possible due to their high value for target species; Bill noted that these are also good for elk. In polygons with more than 70% deciduous, at least 30% of that should be non-Alder species (details around secondary canopy still need to be ironed out). Deciduous canopy >15m tall and >50% cover, at least 12 snags per ha. Patches as large as possible, at least 10% native willow in forest openings and edges. Note: Bob suggests using some of the 514 monitoring budget to ensure the birds we are managing for are actually using the polygons being managed this way. Tony will add this to a TRIG agenda this fall.  Wetlands: Brock will contact LouEllyn and draft "straw dog" objectives / interests for wetland polygons and distribute to TRIG via email.  Access on the property is an issue; there is evidence of recent / current recreational activity on the property. The TRIG reviewed a map showing the various access points onto the property, named the access points, and Marty took notes for documenting this in the Program doc.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 6/3/10 Notes, Page 2 of 4    Final Meeting Notes June 3, 2010 / 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. / Burlington plus WebEx, Call   Access Point A: Accessible for us (poss: remove DNR's tank trap?), but closed to public Access Point B: Same as A Access Points C, D, and E: Find out what DNR plans to do with the road that leads to this. If they are abandoning it, we may only need to deal with access in the short term. If not, we need to think about a gate and/or rock barriers. Also may want to consider planting screen along this road. Access Point F: Our / DNR's primary access, gate Access Point G: Monitor for use, respond accordingly  Marty will take a first "go" at designating the primary focus for each polygon, will incorporate objectives and send out a new draft of the Program document two weeks before the next TRIG meeting.  LOONS Haley gave TRIG an update. Four loon surveys so far. While there hasn't been any visible nesting activity on the platforms, loons have been observed in the area, primarily outside the no-wake zones (two sighted in the first survey, four in the second, none in the third, one in the fourth survey). The geese are all gone. Surveys continue bi-weekly through July.  BALD EAGLES Haley checked to see that everyone had received the survey summary reports. No comments are needed. Next year, for simplicity, the survey summary will be combined with the annual report at the end of May.  OSPREY UPDATE Mel reported that he, Tony, and Elizabeth (PSE's cultural resource scientist) used GPS to identify PSE's property line and found that more of the potential nest tree sites are within our boundary than he and Brock originally thought. He showed a PowerPoint with photos of several potential sites. Mel noted that it may be worthwhile to top and/or create snags of additional trees around our focus trees. This would ensure the nest sites remain dominant longer and could help us meet other objectives. Mel will coordinate the next site visit with Brock. Want to join them? Contact Mel.  BOTANICAL TEAMLET Scott reported that the Reed Canarygrass management plots have been laid out and glyphosate (Rodeo) treatment in WB-17 (approximately a 1200 square foot patch) and WB-30 (approximately 240 square feet) is planned for late summer/fall 2010. Cutting of Reed Canarygrass in WB-17 will occur mid-summer to prevent seed set and to ease application of foliar herbicide spray. Will test areas in WB-17 or WB-30 for license requirements in 510, Carex flava (Wetland emergent revegetation will be planted after treatment). Will look at sites for wetland emergent plantings during mid-June visit.  Scott is planning to contract with Sound Native Plants (cheaper, more responsive) to grow plants for revegetation efforts after herbicide treatment. They are interested in seed collection at Baker Lake.  The draft Plants of Special Status, Habitat Management Plan (HMP) needs to be reviewed by the Botanical teamlet, PSE and TRIG.  A field visit to quantify Reed Canarygrass density at WB-17/30, a Platanthera orbiculata (Round-leaved rein orchid) resurvey, and possibly other plants of special status site visits is planned for June 15th. The trip is open to others if they are interested.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 6/3/10 Notes, Page 3 of 4    Final Meeting Notes June 3, 2010 / 9 a.m. - 12 p.m. / Burlington plus WebEx, Call ARHWG ARHWG is meeting today after the TRIG meeting. The next draft of the plan will be out sometime in June, 2010. MEETING EVALUATION Food, room, meeting logistics worked well for most (long drive for south-end folks) Missed LouEllyn Draft July 1, 2010 TRIG Agenda 9 - 12 at Burlington, WebEx and conference line will be open NCCC presentation Decision: Funding for property search activities Land Acquisition Update: Review potential properties Post-Acquisition Activities: Alder Creek Program document Osprey Update Loon Update ARHWG Meeting following TRIG  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 6/3/10 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2010trig20100603.pdf en 