 Final LEP Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 / 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. Baker River Project License Implementation Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 9:00 am - Noon Baker Lake Lodge FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PSE Upper Baker Operator: 360-853-8608 PRESENT Jeff Turner (Whatcom County Sheriff’s Office), Sgt. Mike Hobbs (WDFW), Pam Garland, Rick Blanton, and Miriam Decker (PSE), Ann Dunphy, Jon Vanderheyden, and Jeremy Smith, (USFS); Mark Watkinson (Skagit County Department Emergency Management), Rob Ralph and James Hamm (Hoodoo Recreation), Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT MEETING DATES  April 26 at Baker Lake Lodge from 10:00 am – 1:00 pm. to review deliverables from this meeting followed by a field trip to survey parking and turnaround options for increased number of vehicles and boats during the sockeye season.  October 18, 2011, following the RRG meeting to debrief the season and carry forward lessons learned. . ACTION ITEMS  Ann: Email Forest Service “Pre-Attack Plan” for fires on east side of Baker Lake to all to review.  Ann Email out revised contact list for all to complete.  Ann Email out draft map showing key features around Lake including cell coverage, campgrounds, trails, etc. Include key emergency phone numbers.  All Review info from Ann and send her your comments / suggestions. Be ready to discuss at next meeting on April 26.  Mike After map has been finalized meet with State Patrol Supervisors and Cascade Dispatch to review map and emergency calling protocols.  Rob Give Ann list of areas where they don’t want the public to park during sockeye season. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 Page 1 of 4  Jeff, Jeremy, Mike Review FS list of key questions to answer when reporting medical and criminal emergencies.  Jeff Send out contact lists to Ann to incorporate.  Pam Call Judy at Arrow Skagit about information needed for emergency calls.  Miriam Send Jeff information relating to PSE’s reporting requirements to FERC. LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA COLLECTION Kim Kinville will serve as the point person to collect suggested changes to the form based on feedback from those using the forms to collect data in a standardized way. FERC NOTIFICATION Pam reminded all that PSE is required to notify FERC (Federal Energy Regulatory Commission) of all serious injuries or fatalities occurring within the project boundary. They should be notified as soon as the immediate need is addressed. When in doubt give them a call. It is better to err on the side of telling them everything that leaving them out of the loop. EMERGENCY SCENARIOS  Chemical spill  Boat collision  Access to east side of Baker Lake including o Using vessels for target practice o Discharging fire arms without knowledge of people nearby o Injured people or animals (E.g., horse that fell off the trail and Animal Rescue out of Seattle had to respond) o Fires (from fireworks or campfires) o Medical injury (life or limb) with or without mobility o Criminal activity CELL PHONE COVERAGE Even when cell service is unavailable it is possible to text up to Mile 21. Then it is dead until Mile 26. Service is usually available:  At Horseshoe Cove and most boat launches (Verizon). Rob noted he can dial 911 from anywhere in the basin.  On the dam and going up FS Road 1107.  At the main PSE boat launch. Rob noted that people who can’t get cell service will call and route through PSE personnel or through Hoodoo. FS hosts at Koma Kulshan get knocks on the door from folks who don’t have call coverage. IMPROVING COMMUNICATION Suggestions:  Give 2-way radios to hosts so they can stay in touch.  Develop a protocol on how to use radios. Note: The FS provides radio training sessions periodically.  Develop protocol to use similar language to describe an incident.  Add signage to trailheads, launches. Say to call 911 if emergency, list the county and nearest mile Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 Page 2 of 4 post. Include also map showing areas of cell coverage and location of emergency phone.  Enlarge County sign If you can drive to location of incident, call 911. If on a cell phone, 911 will see latitude and longitude of the phone (Verizon and AT&T) or of the repeater (if it is an older phone). PSE 911 calls automatically go to Whatcom Co. If Whatcom County officer is not immediately available, then the next closest officer will be deployed. For medical emergencies, they call Skagit County (quicker response). The Marysville State Patrol picks up most 911 calls. The FS pays Skagit Co. 911 (Cascade Dispatch) to monitor after hours emergency calls. The AT&T Tower routes 911 calls to Whatcom County. If can’t drive there, e.g., if on the east side of the lake which is only accessible by boat, the time required to get across the lake can be an issue. Those responding to 911 calls are comfortable with locations of the various campgrounds. Note: Many times recreators don’t know what county they are in. Emergency 911 calls re. injuries on east side of the lake would go to Fire and possibly Search and Rescue. Aid crews will not respond if gun shots are involved. If a boat is needed, should indicate preferred launch point. Same with helicopter. The best way to contact Hoodoo staff is by radio. They have to drive to each others’ campgrounds to communicate with each other. Rob will investigate range of two-way radios. SOCKEYE SEASON - LAW ENFORCEMENT / RECREATION ISSUES WDFW’s current prediction is that the 2011 sockeye run will be 24K fish (2K more than last year), so we can expect the same (or worse) challenges with traffic and parking as we had last season. With Swift Creek Campground open, some of the pressure should be relieved. Sockeye fishing starts the Fourth of July. We discussed ideas of how to help people with parking and keep traffic flowing to the extent possible:  Removing barriers to allow for parking on the grass at Kulshan  Adding signage  Adding attendants to help with early morning parking  Increasing presence of WDFW uniformed officers  Improving the marketing for the season pass Feedback from Hoodoo re last year: The boat launches were full. Vehicles and trailers were parked all the way to the kiosk at Panorama. Rob was hosting by himself the first weekend. Parking was an issue. Sockeye fishermen show up at 4am. Parking lots were jammed from 4am-9am. Not enough parking. Hosts didn’t make the rounds until 9 am. We need to work together to come up with a viable management plan for the coming season. There will be even more hype this year so we should expect more fishermen than last year. Parking Scenarios:  Panorama is best.  Horseshoe is pretty good.  Shannon is terrible. May need to have a parking attendant work mornings. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 Page 3 of 4 We will discuss this further during the field trip immediately following our April 26 meeting. EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER CONTACT LIST Ann distributed a sample contact sheet and asked for feedback on how to improve it to meet our needs. Suggestions included adding the Upper Baker Operator phone number (360) 853-8608, removing the Plan column and adding Key Resources Needed. She will email this out for additional comments and for folks to complete with current information from their organizations. Next Steps: We will finalize this at our April 26 meeting. TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON APRIL 26 AT BAKER LAKE LODGE Review and finalize deliverables:  Annotated map with phone numbers  Comprehensive Emergency Contact List  “Cheat sheets” for hosts of key questions to ask of people reporting criminal and medical incidents Field trip to plan for Sockeye season (parking, etc.) TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON OCTOBER 18, 2011 Review of 2011 Season:  Summary of Data / Trends from Baker Lake Basin Law Enforcement Activity Report  What Went Well? What didn’t?  Prioritize Spending / Focus for 2012 season HANDOUTS  March 09, 2011 LEP Meeting Agenda  February 15, 2011 LEP Meeting Notes  North Cascades Wild 2010 Evacuation Procedures  Emergency Response Plan (USFS)  Communications Plan (USFS)  Draft Contact List Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes March 09, 2011 Page 4 of 4  