Final RRG Meeting Notes  Deleted: Draft  June 21, 2011 / 9:00 – 3:00 / Baker Lake Lodge w/ Swift Creek Campground Visit  Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes June 21, 2011, 9:00 am – 12:00 noon  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change)  Formatted: Default Paragraph Font  PRESENT Pam Garland, Kim Lane, and Elizabeth Dubreuil, by phone (PSE); Ann Dunphy (USFS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete), Jamie Van DeVanter (Van DeVanter Group); Robin McKennon Thaler (Mayfly Engineering + Design), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) REMAINING 2011 RRG MEETING DATES  Hold 9:00 – 11:00 am on these dates for potential conference calls: July 19, Aug. 16, Sept. 20, Nov. 15, Dec. 20  In-Person Meetings: Oct. 18 (followed by LEP Meeting) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. NEW ACTION ITEMS  Pam Look into extending the buoys at Swift Creek so the swimming area is wider and deeper.  Pam Give Ann spare large map to replace stolen one for bulletin board.  Pam Check with Dan Koch about update on plans for FSC construction.  Pam Look into the [possibility of adding signage directing campers to camp hosts in event of an emergency.  Ann Share plans with Jamie for picnic shelter, kiosk, and water safety bulletin board at Swift Creek.  Brock Give Robin Wendy’s and Nick’s contact information so Robin can determine if streams on Lake Shannon are fish bearing and other fish-related issues. (DONE!)  Kim Send out final version of the Project Evaluation process to all to review.  Kim Get Robin copy of sediment / erosion plan for the Lower Baker FSC. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization.  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) – ongoing. APPROVAL OF MEETING NOTES We reviewed and approved the draft February 15 RRG meeting notes. They will be marked as final and posted to the PSE website. Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes June 21, 2011  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 4  Deleted: Draft   LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE Kim announced that with, in a recent reorganization at PSE, Ed Schild is now the Director of Electric Operations and Paul Wetherbee has assumed the role of Director of Electric Operations. Cary will act as License Implementation Manager and Kim will be providing engineering and PM support for licenserelated projects. Kim also shared that at the last BRCC meeting the Project Evaluation procedure for spending adaptive management (RAM) funds was approved. He will send this out to RRG members and we will discuss it at our next meeting. Exhibit G has been accepted by FERC. Pam announced that some of the FERC project boundaries have been changed to include campgrounds and other project features. We will review the new boundary at our next meeting. Kim also reported the decommissioning of the spawning beaches is proceeding. There will be some mitigation done on the cultural side and that area will be restored back to its natural habitat. SA 304: WATER SAFETY IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE Pam reviewed the license requirements for water safety. In brief, PSE is to make funds available within the first year; within 2 years of license issuance, develop safety-related displays and tear-sheet maps (installed on the USDA-FS bulletin boards, as well as other locations identifies in the Settlement Agreement); within 3 years construct and install floating log booms, buoys, etc. to delineate swimming areas. Pam walked us through a PowerPoint that included some of the new bulletin boards displaying water safety information, maps, and photos. She will look into making the swimming area larger / deeper at Swift Creek. We brainstormed the following list of considerations relative to the Annual Reservoir Recreation Hazard Monitoring called for in the license:       Review data from WDFW Enforcement Patrols Consider timing Before and during the recreation season Watch for traveling loon platform buoys (replace with floating line?) Conduct March / April boat survey o Remove big root wads, stumps, tend to sand bars, etc. o Coordinate storage / redeployment of Large woody debris with the ARG. Need new navigation marker if Lone tree on Lone Tree Island has died.  SA 305: LOWER BAKER DEVELOPED RECREATION Pam reminded team members that we are expediting the development of this plan in order to take advantage of efficiencies that could be gained through coordination with the development efforts of the Lower Baker Floating Surface Collector (FSC). Jamie and Robin walked us through some photos and the draft conceptual designs (including a preliminary site plan) for the site. PSE is moving forward with this site as the prior road access issues BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 06/21/2011 Notes, Page 2 of 4  Deleted: Draft   have been resolved. Brian offered that since there is already a use pattern established there, the existing site is a good location as far as Skagit County is concerned. Elizabeth checked on historical / cultural considerations for the Lower Baker Development. She was happy to report that there don’t seem to be any issues of concern. She is currently waiting for the GIS work. Then she will send in letter to the CRAG stating that no historic properties will be affected. The CRAG will then engage in a 30-day review before final approval (which is expected). Elizabeth anticipates the CRAG may want to see Interpretation & Education signage at the site. She will continue to keep us posted. Pam and Jamie met with Brian Adams (Skagit County) regarding the planned development. Brian was on board with the plan and requested the addition of a picnic shelter there. Pam and Jamie would like to use the shelter at Swift Creek Campground as a model for what they will put at Shannon. Ann will send Pam information on the technical specifications and contractor the Forest Service used to build the one at Swift Creek. Jamie explained that the boat ram slope is now at 14 % (listed as ideal on SOBA standards). We are still considering how extensive to make the concrete portion of the ramp. The ramp is very long and costs are a concern. He will be presenting various options for consideration by the RRG. Jamie also explained that he has brought Robin in as a design engineer to work on this project to help design water quality treatment and a plan for erosion and sediment control. Robin explained there are two priorities: First, work to clean the water from the site before it reaches the lake. Second, direct offsite water away from the site to the extent possible. Robin explained that a drop in elevation is required for water quality treatment. She is recommending using a filter strip. She walked us through a handout outlining best management practices for this approach. It would mean sloping the area upstream of the water treatment area and designing it to flow nicely and evenly, which would mean removing anything that would interfere with this flow. There may also be fish considerations as two streams cross the property. She will check with Wendy at WDFW and Nick at PSE on this. Pam will keep everyone posted on the status of this. We will aim to apply for the permit to proceed by the end of this July. SA 318: LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN (LEP) Pam reported that the bear trap has been purchased. There was great rejoicing! It is being housed at the Marblemount hatchery. A use permit is in place for WDFW to park the boat at the Upper Baker Project and protocols are in place for officers to access the boat. Some enforcement patrols are out already. Greta is meeting with WDFW to set the stage for effective and efficient communications in advance of the upcoming sockeye fishery. This is a work in progress. Ann explained that the Forest Service has been working on striping parking lots and will be requiring parking in designated spaces only. They will meet again to debrief the season and apply lessons learned immediately following the RRG meeting at the PSE Skagit Office on October 18. We debriefed learning opportunities surrounding the ability of medics to respond to an explosion campfire incident at the Kulshan campground over Memorial Day weekend. We discussed possibly installing signage indicating that, in addition to calling 911, campers should alert the camp host in event of an BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 06/21/2011 Notes, Page 3 of 4  Deleted: Draft   emergency. Pam will work on this. OTHER RECREATION UPDATES SA 302: Aesthetics Implementation Plan Pam is working on drafting this plan. She hopes to get a draft out for review October 1. SA 302-318: Draft Annual Reports for Agency Review – July 31 Pam announced that all recreation annual reports are due July 31 (for 30 day agency review). Pam is working on those. The SA 301 (all encompassing) report will go out for a 60 day review the end of this year. It will roll into the 601 which is due to FERC April 1, 2012. Swift Creek Grand Opening Ann reported that the Swift Creek Grand Opening will be June 24 from 10:00 – 2:00. There will be tours, food and beverage. The ribbon cutting will occur at noon. OCT 18, 2011 RRG at SKAGIT MEETING TOPICS TO INCLUDE          BRCC Update o Project Evaluation plan for RAM funds o Review updated FERC Boundaries Update on Construction Plans for FSC Lower Baker Development Update Update on Aesthetics Plan (out or review Oct.1 ) Status of Annual Reports Other Topics? Evaluate Meeting  The LEP Meeting will follow. HANDOUTS     February 15, 2010 RRG Draft Notes June 21, 2011 RRG Agenda Draft Schematics and Photos for Lower Baker Development  MEETING EVALUATION Worked Well:     Nice to meet Robin – Welcome aboard! Good updates Perfect way to start the summer!  Deleted: s  Do Differently:   Meet at Skagit Office in Burlington for October combined meeting with LEP  Deleted: Draft  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 06/21/2011 Notes, Page 4 of 4    2011-06-21_ RRG_FinalNotes.pdf en 