Final LEP Meeting Notes February 15, 2011 / 12:30 p.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m.  Baker River Project License Implementation Baker Law Enforcement Coordination Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 15, 2011, 12:30 pm - 3:00 pm PSE Skagit Service Center, Burlington FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Jeff Turner (Whatcom County), Brock Applegate, Sgt. Mike Hobbs and Capt. Bill Hebner (WDFW), Pam Garland, Rick Blanton, and Cary Feldmann and Miriam Decker, by phone (PSE); Ann Dunphy, Capt. Kim Kinville, Jon Vanderheyden, and Jeremy Smith, (USFS); Lyn Wiltse, facilitator (PDSA Consulting) NEXT MEETING DATES March 9 from 9-11am for field trip to survey parking and turnaround options for increased number of vehicles and boats during the sockeye season. Meet at the Baker Lake Lodge at 9am for Emergency Incident Response meeting (1 hour). Field trip to plan how to best address sockeye run-related parking issues will follow. October 18, 2011, following the RRG meeting to debrief the season and carry forward lessons learned. . ACTION ITEMS  All By Feb. 18 give names to Pam for invitations to attend the Emergency Incident Response Meeting at the Baker Lake Lodge on March 9 at 9am.  Pam Set up meeting on Mar. 9 (see above) to address emergency incident response on the east side of the lake. Include communication protocol (e.g., set up group email to alert all to group of kids on the lake canoeing for a week. This is an effective way to share information now as there are NDTs in vehicles.)  Ann Work with Pam to create a spread sheet to hold data for Emergency Incident Response meeting data (prior to March 9 meeting).  Pam By Mar. 4 send out description of discussion with Kim Lane re use of accumulated funds to purchase bear trap and / or deer decoy prior to 2011 recreation season.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 15, 2011  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 3   LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN STATUS Pam explained that the LEP was filed with FERC on June 30, 2010 and is still awaiting approval. Since the plan is considered complete, the PSE funding for PSE actions in an accumulating fund is now available. WAKE ZONE ENFORCEMENT Bill checked into shared enforcement authority for wake zones. WDFW will enforce wake zones by writing up offenders under negligent operation of a vessel. That statute is kind of a catch-all and does not require posting of the wake zones. No Corps involvement is necessary. 2011 WDFW BOAT STORAGE Mike announced that he was successful in procuring a WDFW boat for use at the Baker Lake during the recreation season. There was great rejoicing. Kim shared a photo of the Renegade boat. It is 18'long with an aluminum hull. It will be stored in site. Pam reported that we can store the boat in covered area at the Upper Baker project. PSE will distribute PSE Access Badge to boat operators that would allow them to get through the gate. There is a PSE indemnity agreement Pam has sent to Bill to be signed. This is a PSE requirement. Bill noted that WDFW is self-insured so should be able to accept those terms. Mike explained that initially there will have to be a WDFW operator onboard. Certification from State Parks (40 hour boat operation and safety course) will also be required. An MOU between Whatcom County and WDFW is in effect. It should work both ways. We will establish a similar MOU with the USFS. Jon noted that it might be possible to incorporate this into the USFS MOU for funds. The aim is to have boat in place and ready to operate by opening day of fishing. WDFW has 2 additional boats available if needed for a busy weekend, etc. We agreed to meet at the Baker Lake Lodge on Mar. 9 to do some pre-planning of how to respond to a shooting or if you had to fly someone out from the far side of the lake in an emergency situation. We will discuss our combined resources to respond to such a situation. We will also create contact lists and emergency phone numbers. We need an ample number of boat operators certified. We now have kids on the lake. Pam reminded all that PSE also has boats and people certified to use them. They also have personnel trained as EMTs (in case they were the only ones to respond). SOCKEYE SEASON - LAW ENFORCEMENT / RECREATION ISSUES WDFW's current prediction is for the 2011 sockeye run will be 24K fish (2K more than last year), so we can expect the same challenges with traffic and parking as we had last season. With Swift Creek Campground open, some of the pressure should be relieved. Sockeye fishing starts the Fourth of July. We need to give hosts ideas on how to help people with parking and keep traffic flowing to the extent possible. WDFW is flexible in terms of shifts. LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNDING PROPOSAL Greta emailed the funding proposal to Pam just before the start of the meeting. She was able to project it on the overhead and on Web-Ex for all to review. After some discussion we agreed to approve the suggested allocation of funds.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 15, 2011  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 3   Two additional funding requests were raised by WDFW. These items had been considered during the 2009 season funding discussions: 1. Bear Trap costing $9,100: There were differing views around how much of a bear problem exists in the project area and whether it is a law-enforcement or a wildlife management issue. Bill shared that from May through July WDFW usually has all of their bear traps deployed with none to spare. He sees the trap as addressing a law enforcement issue as the bears often create a public safety issue (people and pets). 2. Deer Decoy costing $2,200: There was a question of project nexus here. Officers agreed that this was a law enforcement issue as poaching is against the law.  Next Steps: By Mar. 4 Pam will take this back to Kim Lane at PSE for review to see if there are accumulated funds that can be used to purchase one or both of these additional items. She will send out an email announcing the decision. We agreed that is makes sense to keep some funds set back to be able to address unanticipated issues.  LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA COLLECTION Kim distributed copies of the draft data collection sheet that she worked with others to create. She will make the suggested edits and send the revised version to Pam to distribute along with the notes from this meeting. After the FS contract has been amended to include this the tracking will begin. Kim will serve as the point person to collect suggested changes to the form based on feedback from those using the forms to collect data in a standardized way.  MEETING EVALUATION Well Done:  Frank discussions Kept to the schedule <ad> agenda was well planned Good participation Great lunch Next steps were clearly defined Facilitation was helpful Great job accomplishing action items Got out early  Do Differently: Need handouts, including budget information to review prior to the meeting.  TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON OCTOBER 18, 2011 Review of 2011 Season:  Summary of Data / Trends from Baker Lake Basin Law Enforcement Activity Report What Went Well? What didn't? Prioritize Spending / Focus for 2012 season  HANDOUTS Final October 9, 2010 LEP Meeting Notes February 15, 2011 Agenda Draft Baker Lake Basin Law Enforcement Activity Report for Baker Lake and Lake Shannon  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 15, 2011  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 3    2011-02-15_LEP_FinalNotes.pdf en 