BAKER RIVER PROJECT RELICENSE Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Botanical Teamlet Meeting Tuesday, March 22, 2011 (9:00 am to 12:30 pm) Risvold Residence Marysville, Washington Scott Heller's cell phone: (206) 437-6042  Draft MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Scott Heller (PSE) 425-457-5578, 206-437-6042 (cell), scott.heller@pse.com Meeting attendees: Ann Risvold (USFS), Laurel Baldwin (Whatcom County NWCB), Scott Heller and Jason Schmidt (PSE), Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental) 1. Welcome, introductions, review notes, agenda (15 minutes)  2. SA 508 Noxious Weeds update- Scotch broom, Canada thistle, reed canarygrass monitoring and trials (2 hr) 3. SA 510 Carex flava, 2011 census (30 minutes)  4. Other items or extended time for previous items (30 minutes)  5. Evaluate meeting, set date, and agenda for next meeting. (15 minutes)  New Action Items: Scott will distribute the Noxious Weed Sighting Forms to be used for new weed sightings at the project. Ann will review the forms for compatibility with the FS forms. Scott will add hawkweed (Hieracium sp.) to his `watch' list. Both Ann and Laurel recall seeing Hieracium (possibly the species laevigatum, which is a Class A weed) near the Upper Baker Dam, although it was not observed during the relicensing surveys. Scott will provide Ann a list of all sites proposed to be treated this summer (2 CYSC and 14 CIAR4 sites), with PSE ID codes.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 2011-03-22 botanicalteamlet finalnotes.doc  1   Ann will check on the status of the NPDES permit that was requested for reed canarygrass treatment in mid-April.  Ann will notify FS recreation staff of plans for weed treatment at the Swift Creek and Sulphur Creek Hatchery sites in early May, and will report to Scott if any additional notifications are requested.  Scott will send out a link to the Minnesota website reporting on trials with grass-specific herbicides.  Jason will look into availability of POAST<ae>, Fusillade DX<ae>, and Clopyralid herbicides. Scott will check with the PSE project manager re: the status and schedule for remaining work and landscaping at the intersection of Baker Lake Highway and old road 1106, where the bridge was removed. He will review the site for weeds and retreat in coordination with other planned activities this summer. Ongoing Action Items: Kathy and Scott will send Ann a GIS shapefile of the current noxious weed `Plan Area' boundary. Kathy and Scott will update the draft weed management plans to reflect the FS approval of two additional herbicides. Not reported during meeting. Summary below has been updated from the November 13, 2009 list: Scott and/or Tony will investigate opportunities for low elevation orthophotography of the Carex flava site at Baker Lake. This may be expanded to include the seven reed canarygrass wetlands and the newly acquired Alder Creek property. Tony will investigate whether a Terrestrial folder can be established on PSE's ftp site for future use in exchanging large documents. SA 508 Noxious Weeds update- Canada thistle and Scotch broom Scott provided an update on the noxious weed activities planned for this year. Weed management priority for 2011 will continue to be sites on NFS lands. The highest priority noxious weeds are Canada thistle (12 sites recorded in 2003) and Scotch broom (2 sites on NFS lands). Most Scotch broom sites on the Baker project (PSE owned lands) were treated in 2010. 2011 activity will include treatment and monitoring of 3 NFS sites and retreatment as needed. One small site on NFS lands at the Sulphur Creek hatchery was completely obliterated during the hatchery renovation activities. The best time for herbicide treatment of Scotch broom was discussed. In order to prevent seed production, herbicide should be applied at bud or early flowering period at the latest. This is probably late April to early May at the project. Laurel recommended aiming for early May for the Swift Creek site. Mechanical removal of the plants can be conducted during any season. Timing for Canada thistle treatment was discussed. An early June reconnaissance trip was agreed upon to determine current extent of populations documented during the 2003 relicensing noxious weed surveys. Clopyralid was discussed as a possibility for herbicide treatments and may be more effective than  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 2011-03-22 botanicalteamlet finalnotes.doc  2   glyphosate. Currently three herbicides are approved for use on NFS lands: The aquatic formulation of Glyphosate, Clopyralid, and Imazapyr. Agridex<ae> is the only surfactant approved. Reed canarygrass management trials were initiated in fall 2010 at WB-17 and WB-30 by treatment with glyphosate aquatic formulation (Aquamaster<ae>) (without surfactant). These sites will be retreated in the spring and fall of 2011 using the surfactant Agridex. The spring treatment is scheduled for mid-April; Ann will check on the status of the NPDES permit, which has been applied for. The NPDES process has been modified, and the permit may have to be reapplied for under the new system. Scott noted that another activity for 2011 may be a trial using the grass-specific herbicides POAST<ae> and/or Fusillade DX<ae>. A site with Carex sp. growing intermixed with reed canarygrass could be used to test the effects of the herbicide on both species. This herbicide is not currently approved for use on NFS lands, so a site on PSE ownership would be selected. One potential site near the Lake Shannon boat launch has been identified. Other Weed Topics Ann noted that her current thinking on herb Robert is to attack the higher elevation roads and sites and work down to the lower watershed sites. The species is abundant, but not continuous, along the Baker Lake Highway, and less common on the side roads. A heat-treatment system called EcoWeeder<ae> was discussed as a possible treatment technique for herb Robert. This infra-red system is noted on The Nature Conservancy's website. Scott will research the system and determine whether a demonstration might be possible. Revegetation after weed treatments was briefly discussed and Ann mentioned that in floodplains and chronically disturbed areas revegetation isn't necessary. Several weeds sites at the Baker Project include roadsides and at Upper Baker, floodplains. Two tansy ragwort sites at Baker Lake were visited last year; no plants were observed. Scott will recheck the sites this year. Ann noted that tansy ragwort also shows up along the Baker Lake Highway near the county line and near the Guard Station. Monitoring of reed canarygrass movement was discussed. Transects have been established at WB-17 and WB-30. The plots were censused several times last year, in order to gain information on the variability of counts at different growth levels of reed canarygrass. Scott and Kathy will review the data and select the monitoring schedule for this year based on an approximate height of reed canarygrass that reflects close to the maximum density of shoots with consideration for the accuracy of counting the shoots. SA 510 Carex flava The draft Conservation Management Plan (CMP) has been reviewed by the botanical teamlet and after it goes through PSE's technical editor, will be presented to the TRIG for approval.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 2011-03-22 botanicalteamlet finalnotes.doc  3   2011 is a census year, and the Carex Working Group has indicated their interest in conducting the work in August. Scott is developing a scope of work based on the 2009 census including the Carex flava and reed canarygrass protocols as revised by the Botanical Teamlet. Next Meeting The date for the next Botanical Teamlet meeting was left open  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150 2011-03-22 botanicalteamlet finalnotes.doc  4    2011-03-22 botanicalteamlet finalnotes.pdf en 