Final Meeting Notes July 25, 2011 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  Baker River Project License Implementation     Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Burpee Hill Property Management Program Teamlet Final Meeting Notes July 25, 2011 ~ 9:00 am - 12:00 pm Burlington Service Center Sauk Room Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller (PSE); Lindsy Wright (USFWS); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Don Gay (USFS); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Marty Vaughn (Biota Pacific; by phone). DECISION: None today NEXT TRIG MEETING: August 4, 2011, PSE Bothell Access Center ACTION ITEMS  Tony – Contact Sauk-Suiattle Tribes and determine who will replace Chris Danilson as representative to the TRIG; update TRIG contact list.  Tony, Marty, Kathy – Provide a summary of activities to be conducted in the first year postacquisition, priorities and sequencing of tasks, and anticipated costs.  Marty – Modify pre-acquisition data collection forms to include percent cover estimates for dominant overstory trees on potential elk forage forested stands, as well as notation of other overstory and understory species (for use in legacy wood). Modify understory data collection to include estimates of percent cover of salal, sword fern, Oregon grape within elk forage stands. LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE: Purchase of the Seefeld Property was finalized last month; the parcel is now referred to as the Burpee Hill property. Easements necessary for access were secured from the neighboring landowner. A new access route will be necessary to avoid WDFW property; this will involve rehabilitating two sections of old logging road and construction of approximately 80-100 feet of new road. The costs of the easements and road construction are part of the cost of acquisition of the property and will be within the ‘not to exceed’ price authorized by the TRIG. The road route has been reviewed by an engineering geologist, the route has been flagged, and the plan is to construct it this fall, once permits have been secured. Tony noted that road evaluation and slope stability analysis will be needed for the property in order to acquire DNR permits for timber harvest and road building. Don recommended reviewing soils BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Burpee Hill Property Teamlet  Final 07/25/11 Notes, Page 1 of 4    Final Meeting Notes July 25, 2011 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  maps or other sources of information on steep slopes to provide preliminary guidance on areas where timber management for elk forage may be restricted. POST-ACQUISITION ACTIVITIES The teamlet discussed the process and next steps for developing the management program. Tony provided handouts of two draft documents: Post Acquisition Information Collection Methods (January 26, 2010) and Post Acquisition Information List (January 26, 2010). The teamlet was also provided a copy of the March 13, 2008 Pre-Acquisition Form for the property, with updates from May 21, 2008 and notes from March 2011. The orthophoto map of initial mapped polygons was reviewed in conjunction with the pre-acquisition habitat data. The assignment of polygons to each of the Settlement Article areas (Deciduous Forest (502), Elk (503), and Wetlands (504)) was reviewed. After discussion of the information that has already been acquired, the group developed a list of additional data collection activities and other actions to be accomplished this year in support of the management program. General:  Construct/rebuild access road and install gate at Burpee Hill Road access point.  Treat existing giant knotweed infestation along Grandy Creek, including a survey of upand downstream locations along the creek for additional infestations.  Conduct additional field review for rare plants and noxious weeds in conjunction with other field efforts in all habitat types.  Development of the Burpee Hill Management Program document (draft due mid-June, 2012). SA 502 Deciduous Forest:  Evaluate an anomalous area in the southern portion of Polygon 14 and northern portion of Polygon 3a which is dominated by coniferous forest, rather than deciduous. Determine whether this area needs to be mapped and managed separately from the surrounding deciduous habitat and determine how it should be managed. There may be opportunities for legacy wood management.  Evaluate the SA 502 polygons and any steep slope areas restricted from timber management with respect to legacy wood. Natural snag recruitment may be low in stands dominated by relatively young alder and the pre-acquisitions surveys don’t report subdominant species that may contribute to recruitment. Conduct walk-through surveys to document existing snag levels and estimate expected natural recruitment. Determine the best locations to create snags to supplement natural recruitment. Develop management prescriptions based on this information.  Consult with Bob Kunz, NPS, in development of SA 502 management proposal. SA 504 Wetlands:  Conduct field review to identify and map wetlands that may not have been detected through the pre-acquisition evaluation. This effort may be coordinated with other field BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Burpee Hill Property Teamlet  Final 07/25/11 Notes, Page 2 of 4    Final Meeting Notes July 25, 2011 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call    efforts such as stream typing for cost efficiencies. Ideally, the wetland evaluation would be funded by the wetland budget and stream typing would be funded by the elk budget. Conduct amphibian egg mass surveys of different types of wetlands on the site (e.g., spirea shrub, alder forested, emergent). Use time-constrained or area constrained methods that will provide an indication of density as well as species presence. Consider involving Skagit Community College in the survey efforts. A study plan will be necessary by early winter in order implement early season surveys.  SA 503 Elk:  Evaluate and map streams, roads, steep slopes, and other elements as required for DNR Forest Practices permits.  Conduct field review of stand data in polygons 7 and 8. These were not visited during the pre-acquisition surveys.  Evaluate understory vegetation composition in elk management polygons. Determine methods to be used, with emphasis on identification of areas where the understory is dominated by the three key avoided species: salal, sword fern, and Oregon grape. (Refer to T21 Relicensing Study, Davis, et al. 2003 for a list of neutral, selected, avoided forage species.)  Based on vegetation composition and other site management considerations (sensitive areas, timber value, cost of road-building, etc.), determine potential management units and draft management prescriptions (e.g., rotational harvest, partial harvest, permanent forage plots) for elk forage areas. Seek to balance costs of long-term management with revenue from timber sale and benefits to elk forage. Plan to present the proposed harvest plan within the DNR Long-Term Plan Application and Alternate Plan, so that it will be pre-approved for 15 years.  Refer to WDFW PHS Guidelines for management of timber harvest activity within goshawk nest area and post-fledging area.  Funding Schedule: Don noted that he believes acquisition funds can be used to conduct postacquisition surveys. This could be used in cases where management funding is not yet available. Tony noted that SA 502 (Deciduous Forest) funding for 2012 will be assigned to the budget in October 2011; the TRIG can begin charging against that budget now. The SA 502 funding language does not distinguish acquisition from management funds. Wetland funds become available in October 2012 for both acquisition and management. Some of the funds are already dedicated for acquisition and will be used to repay loans from the SA 503 (Elk) fund. Funding for elk habitat acquisition has been provided since 2008, and has supported purchase of the Alder Creek and Burpee Hill properties. Additional acquisition funding is currently available, and BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Burpee Hill Property Teamlet  Final 07/25/11 Notes, Page 3 of 4    Final Meeting Notes July 25, 2011 / 9 a.m. - Noon / Web-X, Call  third phase of funding will be available in 2013. This will include repayments of loans to SA 502 and 504 (deciduous forest and wetlands). Approximately $50,000 is available annually for management. Tony noted that this amount may not be adequate to cover all the 2011 costs of the Alder Creek Property management as well as anticipated activities on the Burpee Hill Property. An updated budget summary will be presented at next week’s TRIG meeting NEXT MEETING – No meeting date scheduled. Next steps will be discussed at the August 4, 2011 TRIG Meeting.  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT  FERC PROJECT NO. 2150‐033, 027   Burpee Hill Property Teamlet  Final 07/25/11 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2011trig_burp20110725.pdf en 