Final Meeting Notes February 2, 2012 / 9 a.m. <ad> 2 p.m. / Bothell with Web-X, Call     Baker River Project License Implementation  Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group Final Meeting Notes  Team Leader: Tony Fuchs (PSE), 425-462-3553, tony.fuchs@pse.com  PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Haley Edwards, Scott Heller, Cary Feldmann, and Ira McDaniel and Lisa Salton by phone (PSE); Brock Applegate (WDFW); Stan Walsh by phone (SRSC); Kathy Smayda (Smayda Environmental); Bob Nelson (RMEF); Patrick Goldsworthy (NCCC); and Jamie Riche, facilitator (PDSA)  UPCOMING MEETINGS 3/13 <ad> Joint ARG/TRIG meeting to review 505 proposals 4/5 <ad> Next TRIG meeting; ARG to join in for part of the day to vote on 505 proposals, times TBD 4/10 <ad> Next BRCC meeting likely to be paired with April ARG meeting  DECISION: Today's decision postponed; will be addressed via email (see notes for details).  ACTION ITEMS   Tony  Add "Safety Minute" as a standing item on future agendas   Ira Mail Stan and Brock info on potential land acquisitions, prioritized for 2012   Tony  Look into FTP posting with additional layer of login for acquisition-related documents   Tony  Create a draft prioritization and schedule for the projects on the Alder Creek DNR LTA road  plan for TRIG's review and consideration   Tony  Email out 2012 Alder Creek and Burpee Hill work plans   All  Please review Alder Creek program doc; let Tony know if you would like any changes, both  re: Alder Creek and in terms of its use as a template for Burpee Hill program doc   Haley  Work with Brock to incorporate clarifications into the Legacy Wood Implementation  Procedures document; email to TRIG in track-changes format for review   Tony  Queue up an email decision for approval of the Legacy Wood document   Scott  Send out draft plans / schedule for amphibian surveys for TRIG review / feedback   All  Review the plans / schedule for amphibian surveys, give feedback re: priority species   All  If you would like a copy of the Carex flava census report, ask Scott  PREVIOUS - STILL RELEVANT - ACTION ITEMS:   Tony  Consult with Steve D. (WDFW) re: the Goshawk nest survey (added 2/2: also ask about  required habitat for nesting area)   Tony, Haley, Scott - Compile list of suggested monitoring goals and activities related to Article 514,  develop a draft plan for TRIG to review / edit (Tony: elk; Scott: wetlands; Haley: forest)   Marty  Modify pre-acquisition data collection forms to include percent cover estimates for dominant  overstory trees on potential elk forage forested stands, as well as notation of other overstory  and understory species (for use in legacy wood). Modify understory data collection to  include estimates of percent cover of salal, sword fern, Oregon grape w/in elk forage stands.   Cary, Stan Coordinate meeting between PSE and the Tribes regarding access on acquired lands  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group Page 1 of 4    UPDATE ON PREVIOUS ACTION ITEMS Cary reported that about $8k (left over from Late Seral Forest work) has been moved into the TERF fund. Tony reported that he, Chris M., Chris D., and others went on a site visit to coordinate access on the acquired lands (Alder Creek for now) for the Tribes' planned clover trap and elk collaring activity. Tony and Ira are working with WDFW to develop maps and coordinate a "hunting allowed with written permission" program for the acquired lands.  BRCC UPDATE The second joint RRG / Law Enforcement meeting was postponed due to snow; it has been rescheduled to 2/22. The next BRCC conference call is scheduled for 2/14. The fourth Wednesdays are reserved for BRCC conference calls as needed. In-person meetings are scheduled semi-annually. The April in-person BRCC meeting is likely to be paired with the April ARG meeting, so mark your calendars for 4/10 (rather than the usual fourth Wednesday).  TRIG BUDGET UPDATE Lisa Salton (PSE's new financial analyst for the Baker Project) and Tony walked the group through a spreadsheet of the current budget, which includes any balances rolled over from last year, all deposits for this year, and escalation / interest payments. O&M balances may change slightly once current interest rates are factored into the escalation and interest deposits.  O&M Balances: Article 503 Elk: $73,848 Article 504 Wetland: got its first O&M deposit this year - $10k plus escalation and interest Article 505 Aquatic Riparian: $265,188 Article 508 Reed Canary Grass: $72,468 Article 511 Legacy Wood: $58,269 Article 512 Bald Eagle Surveys: $1 (work is completed) Article 514 Effectiveness Monitoring: $10,140  Tony will work with Lisa to make the appropriate transfers in the capital budgets. See the October 6, 2011 notes for an overview of the transfers related to the Alder Creek and Burpee Hill acquisitions. We'll see an update at the April TRIG meeting.  LAND ACQUISITION UPDATE Tony projected the collated, prioritized list of projects that have been or are under consideration for acquisition. He and Ira would prefer not to email this out due to the porous nature of email and the confidentiality required. Tony/Ira will mail a copy of the list to Stan and Brock. He will also look into the ability to add an extra layer of login to the FTP site. In the meantime, if you have questions or would like a copy of the list, call Tony or Ira.  POST-ACQUISITION UPDATE, ALDER CREEK Tony walked the group through the DNR Long-Term Application (LTA) Forest Practices Permit road plan, which closely mirrors Bruce Stoker's recommendations and is the portion of the LTA that DNR was most attentive to. DNR requires this work to be done within the 15-year term of the permit, but did not mandate a more specific timeframe. Since this work impacts O&M budgeting, Cary suggested Tony prioritize the projects and propose a schedule for TRIG's consideration. With much of 2012 O&M money committed to "year one" activities Burpee Hill, it is unlikely that any of this work would start this year. Kathy pointed out that any work related to fish-bearing streams will require an HPA and any work would need to be done in the HPA window.  Tony also briefly reviewed the Alder Creek harvest unit maps from the DNR permit to show how the units were divided and where reserve tree areas (including forested buffers) are located. Tony reminded the group that the Alder Creek program document will be updated with all of the current information from the DNR  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 2/2/12 Notes, Page 2 of 4    process. He asked the group to review this document again, both to see if there are any changes desired to the AC program and to see if there are any changes to the format before PSE uses the AC document as the template for the Burpee Hill program document.  He projected the 2012 Alder Creek work plan, which is primarily the following: amphibian surveys, brush management with RMEF volunteers, grading work on the road into the meadow area, mow meadow areas (August), noxious weed work as needed, and seeding as needed.  POST-ACQUISITION UPDATE, BURPEE HILL Tony reviewed the planned year one activities and estimated costs spreadsheet. He is beginning work on the draft Burpee Hill program document, which is slated to be available for TRIG review in late May. Other 2012 Burpee Hill activities are primarily focused on gathering the information needed for the DNR LTA permit. Road, steep slope, wetland and stream mapping are slated for March.  Tony asked if there were any concerns related to the work plans. Brock asked for the work plans to be emailed out so he can review them in greater detail off-line. No concerns were raised at this time.  Tony and Scott walked the group through the amphibian survey schedule (the dates are species-specific, generally to be done in spring and early summer). Tony extended an invitation; all are welcome to join in on survey work and site visits. Brock pointed out that the Oregon spotted frog and bullfrog surveys are important since they have the potential to impact management decisions. He asked if the amphibian surveys could be limited to focus just on those species that impact management decisions in order to save O&M money. The group agreed with that concept. Scott will send out the draft plan schedule; please review and provide feedback about which species are high vs. low priority.  LEGACY WOOD UPDATE Haley reminded us that the Legacy Wood Implementation Procedures document is the "bridge document" between the management plan document that goes to FERC and the site-specific plans for each acquired parcel. This was reviewed at the TRIG meeting last October, then updated, edited, and distributed via email for a decision. Brock asked for this to be brought back to the meeting for review and dialogue prior to approving.  The group reviewed Brock's proposed clarifications, which centered on the characterization of Legacy Wood work as a secondary goal. Haley and Scott noted that the reference to 511 being secondary does not mean that the Legacy Wood work is unimportant, but is an acknowledgement that any acquired property would have a primary purpose related to the fund(s) that paid for the purchase. Scott added that section 3.4 helps clarify the primary / secondary nature of this work. Brock also wanted to ensure that alternative management options (not just rotational harvest) remain available for consideration as appropriate. Haley will work with Brock to incorporate his clarifications and will distribute the updated doc via email in track-changes format. Tony will queue up an email decision.  Also, for future, Brock asked that documents in review be distributed via Word for easier commenting in Track Change mode. Haley noted that she put the document into PDF to save on file size. With the FTP site up and working, that isn't an issue anymore, so Word will reign.  BOTANICAL UPDATE The Botanical teamlet has been focused on work related to Plants of Special Status monitoring and Carex flava census reporting (complete). Since Carex flava is a sensitive plant and the census gives specific locations, the report will not go onto the website; Scott has distributed it to folks who have expressed interest in the past. Want a copy? Ask Scott.  Next up for bid: updating the noxious weed management plan (last updated in 2008). In March, Scott will coordinate a test of "Poast" herbicide on reed canarygrass near sedges. There will be a site visit to map reed  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 2/2/12 Notes, Page 3 of 4    canarygrass at the as-yet-unreviewed wetlands in April or May, and another site visit to reed canarygrass sites in late July or August to look at the areas the Carex Working Group recommended for trimming and to discuss management options. There will also be a planting party sometime in late spring for those wetland emergent plants being grown / held for us by Sound Nursery. Tony and Scott will identify a source for the elk forage seed mix (reviewed at the December meeting), and Tony will purchase a supply to have on hand for this year's management activities. OTHER UPDATES, LOON Haley noted that Loon surveys will start again in April. She will email out information in March. MEETING EVALUATION Downstairs Bothell room is nice (only for small gatherings, though) Excitement abounds for 2012 plans <ad> "We have properties and are cruising along `adequately'!" Keep documents in Word during review, post to FTP site to avoid overloading email inboxes Draft April 5 Agenda (half-day TRIG meeting, then joint ARG/TRIG 505 meeting) <ad> Location: Skagit Service Center.  Agenda, Safety Minute Review Notes and Action Items BRCC / License Updates TRIG Capital Budget Update Land Acquisition Updates Post-Acquisition Updates Botanical Update Loon Update Joint TRIG / ARG re: ARHWG proposals  BAKER RIVER HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT FERC PROJECT NO. 2150033, 027   Terrestrial Resources Implementation Group FINAL 2/2/12 Notes, Page 4 of 4     2012trig20120202.pdf en 