Final LEP Meeting Notes February 22, 2012 / 10:30 p.m. <ad> 3:00 p.m.  Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012 10:45 <ad> 3:00 pm Skagit Service Center, Burlington  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Jeff Turner and Doug Chadwick (Whatcom Co. Sheriff's Office); Capt. Bill Hebner and Sgt. Rich Phillips (WDFW); Pam Garland and Miriam Decker (PSE); Capt. Kim Kinville, Ann Dunphy, Carol Gladsjo, and Greta Movassaghi (USFS); Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete); and Lyn Wiltse, note taker, (PDSA Consulting) NEXT LEP MEETING DATES June 19 at the Baker Lake Lodge to include field trip to review effects of Sockeye fishery on east side of the lake and at boat ramps, in combination with RRG meeting at BL Lodge. Oct. 16 (RRG and LEP) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. ACTION ITEMS All When Pam sends out draft notes, please review ASAP and let Pam know if you want to suggest are any changes. Pam Work with Captain Hebner to coordinate key access to gates on newly acquired properties. Rich Send cheat sheet of WDFW regulations to Pam by April 15. Kim Send FS rules and regs and updated Patrol log to Pam by April 15. Pam Attach 2011 expenditures, LEO orientation packet maps, Baker Lake Spreadsheet, phone emergency contacts for all to review and provide feedback by April 15. All Review orientation packet and send changes to Pam by April 15. Pam Send out spreadsheets and calendar (after Greta fixes it), along with draft objectives and Emergency Contact List along with these notes asking all to update them for their organizations by April 15. Greta Investigate the possibility of setting up a LEO Information/Message line on the FS system.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 6   Bill Jeff Rich  Pam Bill Pam Kim Rich Bill  Bill  Rich  Email PSE Baker Lake Overtime (BLOT) forms. Send copy of MOU between WDFW and Whatcom County. Arrange boat training for any LEPs that may need to operate the boat in response to an emergency. Have Pam attend. Combine with RRG meeting on June 19? Work with WDFW to renew the agreement to store WDFW boat on PSE property. Work with Pam to ensure all WDFW officers have key cards for access to gates. Make sure Jeff and other Whatcom Co. LEOS have key cards that work for gates. Update patrol logs in accordance with suggested changes from LEOs. Send marine collision safety course info to Pam. Check to see if it is possible to roll average mileage costs for WDFW billing for LEPs in Baker Basin. Check out possibility of supporting inner city youth program (Free fishing weekend? Free fishing poles?). Check on PFD loaner program possibilities  ANNOUNCEMENTS Captain Bill Heber introduced Sgt. Richard Phillips to the group. He has replaced Mike Hobbs on this team and was very involved with patrols this season. Welcome, Rich!  Larry Bowman's position (Sedro-Woolley) has now been replaced with Keith Kirsch. Jeff Lee is still working and will be bringing the bear trap. Worth left last month to pursue other dreams. He will be missed. A former member of the Burlington Police Dept, John Ludwig, will be taking Worth's position. John lives in and loves Concrete.  WDFW can now fuel their boat at the project. We will review the process. There is a log at the fuel facility where they will record the number of gallons each time they fuel up. They may need to contact the operator. Just need one key and that can be left in the boat. There was much celebrating at this news!  INTENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT PLAN Pam and Greta walked the group through a review of the LEP Objectives which include addressing funding responsibilities with applicable LEP agencies with jurisdiction in the Project area and the Baker Basin including protection measures for facilities, natural resources, etc. Objectives of the plan include establishing communication protocols for funding to best benefit the needs in the project area. These include safety, law enforcement, user management, Basin patrols, information and education, zoning on Baker Lake to provide safe areas for motorized and non-motorized water craft, and coordination among staff to ensure effective and efficient law enforcement and emergency response. It also calls for PSE to help create a unified agency presence, increase public safety and safeguard natural resources in the project area. Potential training topics for LEOs include identification and protection of cultural resources.  The overarching goal is to address issues that result from visitors attracted to the reservoir as a result of the project being there. This includes the ability to patrol, educate, deter, and investigate violations of Federal and State laws on the Baker Basin. The range of associated activities includes handling a variety of criminal complaints, illegal drug use, traffic violations, public health and safety issues, appropriate medical response, resource protection, public education, and fire safety.  Greta reiterated that the whole purpose of the relicensing effort and the funds PSE is providing to address  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 6   issues are for those things that are related to the project. Our primary focus is to address that which is resulting from the project. Our priorities for allocating our limited funds should reflect this. There is also an emerging issue with the sockeye fishery season. Since the license has been implemented, the sockeye fishery has been advanced considerably. We are trying to play catch-up. Some of the emerging issues there include:  Traffic, parking, boaters coming into the campground at O-dark-thirty Increased use of the east side of the reservoir (how would we deal with issues over there?) General trampling of vegetation Garbage Incorrect use of boat ramps Invasive species Other violations that come with increase of use, no-wake zones for wildlife and public safety. An observation by the LEOs: Many people go out to the Baker Basin to be free of laws. REVIEW OF 2011 CONTRACT In the spirit of continual improvement, we want to be able to spell things out clearly and correctly so the contracts can guide expectations. Jeff noted certain money allocated for call-outs. He observed that if you pull patrol deputies down to the Baker Basin, they are on straight time. They have no reason to track their hours as OT hours. Jeff isn't sure how well that money is being called out so it can be recovered. We get more "bang for the buck" from scheduled patrol hours. We need to account for incidences that occur after everybody goes home. We recognize this as a need and don't want to leave Whatcom County without coverage. We also wanted Jeff to be compensated for his extended patrol hours. Patrol Logs The aim of these forms is to provide feedback and accountability. In the future, if any Whatcom County officers don't fill the patrol logs out correctly and with sufficient detail, Doug said we should send them back. Being able to fill these out correctly will make the officers eligible for OT. Kudos to officers Steve Harris, Bob Taylor, and Jeff Turner for providing a good amount of detail on these forms. Greta reported the FS doesn't receive the logs until about a month after they have been completed. They didn't receive WDFW's until the end of the year. Bill suggested we improve the timely submission of the logs by sending them straight to PSE and the FS on a monthly basis, weekly if possible. Whatcom County will send the forms to Pam and copy Greta in addition to Jeremy at the end of every shift. Next Steps: 1. Modify forms to add a third column and shorten some spaces for contact numbers; Modify them also for FPO's (Kim will do this and distribute to all to review. Ann will add table for FPO data)) 2. Fill out sample and include in orientation / training for LEOs 3. Ensure adequate explanation of why the forms matter Communication Greta explained that the FS has non-LEO seasonal staff working daytime shifts in the Baker Basin. LEOs' shifts start mid day or later. FPOs (Forest Patrol Officers) may want to pass on information to LEOs as they leave shift and LEOs come on. They are encouraged to do so. Similarly, when LEOs see a noncommissioned FS employee in the area, they are encouraged to check in with them to see if they have any  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 6   important information they want to pass on. Baker Basin Law Enforcement Information Tools We discussed various options to facilitate the transfer of key information from one shift to another. These included the following:  Drop box to provide gate access PSE setting up a lock box with access card key Setting up a Law Enforcement voicemail box on the FS system (See below) Greta indicated that the FS has phone system that is capable of adding a line for this purpose. It would work just like any other voicemail. When you dial in to check messages, you get the most recent messages first. We would have to establish a protocol about when and how messages would get deleted. Greta has confirmed that this is an option we can implement. LEOs/FPOs would leave messages as they leave the basin and check them when they arrive (as needed). The Koma Kulshan Guard Station would be a logical place for people to pick up and drop off info-packets and FS- keys, etc. or set up a check-in/check-out system at the Whatcom County Office). WDFW officers are now checking in with Whatcom County dispatch before going out and that is working great. The FS would like to see WDFW step up LEO hours from their funding to support the sockeye season. WDFW has been the major on-the-water law enforcement presence. The FS is prepared to fund the same amount as last year. They would like to have further regarding the sockeye fishery with WDFW, to describe their concerns and request additional assistance. This would be a higher priority than extending patrols into hunting season. WDFW spent 120 hours of non-FS / non-PSE OT. There are also bear trapping issues, etc. Jeff is in support of seeing WDFW patrols extended into hunting season. He sees a possibility of them working together with Whatcom County in areas where they (WDFW) can share their expertise regarding fish and game laws. A couple of combined shifts like this would fall into training / cross training category. There is also a 40-hour marine collision course that Jeff would like to attend. It is held in Kennewick every year. OPPORTUNITIES FOR 2012 / 2011 IMPLEMENTATION COSTS For 2012 estimates, Greta separated the OT shift from the call-out hours for Whatcom County, pending further discussion with Det. Chadwick about how to best structure the agreement language. She is suggesting 15 10-hour shifts and also 100 misc hours. It is less than what was planned last year, but still 80 hours more than was spent; 250 hours total. The FS is planning for 14 10-hour OT shifts and 140 extended hours. Note: Jeremy was hoping for more hours. They are planning on 280 hours this year compared with 320 hours last year. The FS is also budgeting for an increase in amount of funding for FPOs. This would mean 4 FPOs working 1000 hours total and covering both sides of the lake for the season (instead of the 2 working 480 hours in 2011). The FS suggests that <be> of hours would still go to commissioned officers <ad> and they would double the FPOs. While they don't handle incidences involving drugs and alcohol, violent behavior, and can't detain anyone, they can give warnings and can write tickets. They will try this new arrangement for this season and then review how effective it was.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 6   They propose to keep WDFW at the same number of hours as last year with $500 allocated for mileage. The FS total law enforcement budget is just under $74K for the year (the amount of annual payment). This allows for some additional contingency funds. Note: we added some of these to (the budget that came out with the notes (dated 02/24/12). Pam indicated that PSE is proposing to cut 5-10 hour shifts (from 200 to 150 hours) for Whatcom County. They still want coverage during the busy days of holiday weekends (there is less of a need when people are packing up to head home on Mondays). They are looking for opportunities to reallocate law enforcement to times that would be uncovered. They would still have 2 deputies on Fridays and Saturdays. When Fourth of July hits mid-week, there isn't much law enforcement demand. PSE has proposed to keep WDFW hours at 200, with flexibility around how many hours are outside of peak time (June and September). A portion (50%) of their time is obligated to Lake Shannon and lower project area. There may be an opportunity in 2013 to add a second campground host in 2013 to help with management of the 108 sites. Funding for this would more than likely not come from law enforcement. Captain Hebner suggested USFS and PSE review their 2012 calendar again with an eye toward number of expected boat days. There is concern the sockeye fishery will be 50% bigger than it was last year. PSE has requested 50 percent of WDFW law enforcement support to be at Lake at Shannon. There is a need for enforcement in Skagit County. Corrina reminded all that there is a new sheriff in Concrete. We may want to contact him and fill him in on our goals and plans for the 2012 season. 2012 EQUIPMENT REQUESTS Two non-flash trail cameras @ $600 each One pair stabilizing binoculars @$2500 (would be kept securely in WDFW boat (Bill and Greta to discuss) Night vision goggles (to be considered for 2013 season) One low-band radio for WDFW @$1K (USFS to purchase this for 2012 season). This has turned out to be unnecessary. Weapon light for Jeff's rifle @ $1K (He is currently using his own personal light.) This is to be considered for the 2013 season. TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP GATHERING AT BAKER LAKE LODGE ON JUNE 19, 2012 Review LEO Orientation Packet o Check-in Protocol o Sample completed (revised) Patrol logs o Maps o Baker Lake spreadsheet o FS, WDFW Rules and Regs o Emergency Response Contact Info and Protocols Participate in East side of the lake field trip Review signage at boat ramps  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 5 of 6   o Review bulletin boards to validate boater information, rules and regs, include "911" and show location information, including which county. TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP GATHERING ON OCTOBER 16, 2012 Review of 2012 Season:  Complete Review of Summary of Data / Trends from Baker Lake Basin Law Enforcement Activity Reports  What Went Well? What didn't? Pre-proposals: Prioritize Spending / Focus for 2012 season MEETING EVALUATION Well Done:  Loved the bear trap demo! Good participation Spreadsheets were helpful We all want to do what's best for the resources High commitment was demonstrated by all Review of LEP intent provided context for our discussions Appreciated Greta's explanation of the spreadsheet. Do Differently: End on time Distribute spreadsheet handouts HANDOUTS October 18, 2011 LEP Meeting Notes February 22, 2012 LEP Meeting Agenda Forest Service Summary of Impacts of the 2011 Sockeye Fishing Season on Baker Lake : 1/13/2012 PARKING LOT Presentation on bear management of bear complaint resolution process <ad> triggers and how WDFW manages these <ad> when to release on site or take out of the area, etc.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 22, 2012  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 6 of 6    2012-2-22_LEP_FinalNotes.pdf en 