 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 19, 2012 / 9:00 – 10:30 / Baker Lake Lodge, Concrete, WA 98237 Baker River Project License Implementation Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes June 19, 2012, 9:00 am – 10:30 am Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) PRESENT Pam Garland, Cary Feldmann, Miriam Decker and Lynda Kupfer (by phone) (PSE); Ann Dunphy and Jon Vanderheyden (USFS); Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete); Thomas Decateau (Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribal Community); and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and note taker (PDSA Consulting). DECISIONS: None today. FUTURE RRG MEETING DATES 9:00 – 11:00 am on the second Tuesday of each month is a placeholder for potential meetings or conference calls. We will provide Web-Ex capability for these meetings to facilitate remote attendance. Next Scheduled In-Person Meeting:  Oct. 16, 2012 (RRG and LEP) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. Website: All are invited to check out the new Baker Licensing website. You can find Baker River documents available to the resource groups such as resource group plans, reports, meeting notes, etc., via PSE.com: http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx NEW ACTION ITEMS  All In addition to the above date, please continue to reserve the third Tuesday of each month from 9-11:00 for possible additional meetings or conference calls.  Ann Let Pam know which GIS layers you would like PSE to post to the FTP site.  Pam See if it is possible to schedule another water safety monitoring sweep before July 1 with focus on the Lake Shannon launch.  Ann Email to Pam updated information discussed as appropriate for the LEP / FPO orientation packet by the end of June.  Jeff Send updated version of spreadsheet with mileage, call coverage, etc. to Pam to include in the orientation packets by the end of June. ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project NO. 2150 RRG Final Meeting Notes June 19, 2012 Page 1 of 4  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) – ongoing. REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES The finalized meeting notes from our last meeting on February 22, 2012 have been posted to the PSE website. We also reviewed the agenda and noted that all Action Items have been completed! LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION / BRCC UPDATE Cary reported that the BRCC last met on May 30. The PSE Baker License Website shows updates from the various working groups as well as a comprehensive PowerPoint presentation that Cary put together to tell the story of the Baker Project relicense process. A comprehensive calendar of the times and locations of all Baker working group meetings is posted on the website. The Cultural Resource Advisory Group (CRGA) will meet June 20, 2012 to discuss decommissioning of spawning beaches. They will also review the historic impacts of planned modifications to the dam. The Aquatics Resource Group (ARG) met last week and reviewed items related to the productivity in the spawning beaches and the upcoming fishery. They rolled out the new flow implementation plan (Article 106). When the Lower Baker Powerhouse is complete, this will replace the Interim Protection Plan. Three projects have been approved for the ARG/TRIG joint initiative (Article 505) for riparian habitat. More money is available in the fund for additional land purchases and enhancement. They are working on expanding storage for Large Woody Debris in the project area. It is available for use by other resource groups for such uses as habitat enhancement and bank stabilization efforts. There were 440K out- migrating sockeye this year. They are expecting a record return of 35K adults. So far 136 adults have come back to the adult fish trap. The Lower Baker Floating Surface Collector (FSC) is scheduled to be launched on July 23, 24 of this year. The boat launch will be closed to the public on the week of July 23. It will be deployed in March of 2013. Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group (TRIG) is focusing on developing management plans for the two newly acquired properties. Loon platforms are out (populated by geese). Osprey are doing well. The fourth Wednesdays will continue to be reserved throughout 2012 for BRCC conference calls as needed. PSE POSITION CHANGES Cary announced the following organizational changes within the Hydro Group at PSE. Much of this is due, at least in part, to the value of long-term power decreasing considerably since the time of the Settlement.  There will be a new plant manager at Baker. John Jensen has moved to Walla Walla and is focusing on maintenance management systems for the Wind Plants.  Lloyd Pernela is planning to retire in early September. There will be a new supervisor of Dam Safety. Irena Netik is the manager of that group.  There will be a new position for Manager of Licensing. It will include responsibilities in the area of environmental and land use.  Mel Walters, Haley Edwards (avian), and Elizabeth Dubreuil (archaeology) have been moved into the Land Use and Science Group. Baker River Hydroelectric Project Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/19/2012 Notes, Page 2 of 4 PROJECT EVALUATION FOR RAM FUNDS Cary and Greta are working on this offline. We will review the draft to establish protocols around the accounting for RAM funds proposed and spent. A draft should be ready to review at our next meeting. OTHER RRG ITEMS 302: Aesthetics Resources Implementation Plan (ARIP) This plan includes detailed specifications for vegetation screening, including a list of native plants, acceptable colors, and types of materials that can be used for certain project features. The draft of this implementation plan will be out for review to RRG members before June 30, 2012 and must be approved before actions called out in the Settlement Agreement can be taken. This is a local plan that does not have to be filed with FERC. These include vegetation screening. Also planned is landscaping at the Lower Baker Visitor Complex for this autumn. The Lower Baker powerhouse crane will be painted a neutral earth-tone color during the next normal painting cycle. The pump station is currently painted a neutral color. 304: Water Safety (Recreation Hazard Monitoring / Swim Area Correctives) Pam was able to make the requested corrections at the Swift Creek swim delineation. She also has procured replacement decals for those that became extremely faded. PSE and the USFS both have sufficient maps / tear sheets to last the season. Pam reported that she was able to complete two days of recreation hazard monitoring, specifically at boat access sites for Baker Lake. The first day was in late March and was from land. Access was very limited, due to snow, and so no hazards were identified at that time. A second monitoring day, May 23, was completed by boat, inspecting the following launch and swim areas: Kulshan boat launch, Horseshoe Cove boat launch and swim area, Panorama Point, Swift Creek boat launch and swim area, and Shannon Creek boat launch. The monitoring is specific to “Identification of any hazards that would make it unsafe to launch or retrieve a boat, or unsafe to swim in specified swim areas.” All launches were clear with the exception of Shannon Creek. Pam put in a request to have debris removed from that launch. Other launch, retrieval, and swim areas were checked to be clear of debris. She sent a note to Ann and Greta on the status of these sites. LEP Contracts / Boat Storage Agreement / Access PSE and USFS both have law enforcement contracts in place with WDFW and Whatcom County. PSE has finalized an agreement with WDFW to store a patrol boat at the project. Jeff already has access. There are 9 officers that could potentially use the boat. Access will be to Gates 2 and 3 only (no building access). There is also a procedure whereby they can fuel their boats on site. Pam sent out a description of this procedure a couple of weeks ago. Review of LEP / FPO Orientation Documents Pam distributed a packet of materials for possible inclusion in the officer orientation packet we will be introducing as new this year. The packet includes an updated Patrol Log, a map of the project area to help with incident response, and a list of objectives included in the contract language with PSE, USFS, WDFW, and Whatcom County. Also included are USFS CFRs (regulations). The schedule needs to be updated to reflect that the fishery will starting early July instead of late July. We will review missing information from the packets during the LEP meeting. These items include key contacts, phone numbers, and mileages associated with major locations in the Basin. Pam will add these as well as latitude / Baker River Hydroelectric Project Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/19/2012 Notes, Page 3 of 4 longitude of major landmarks, radio frequencies, heli-spots transfer locations and GPS. October 16, 2012 RRG at Baker Lake Lodge MEETING TOPICS TO INCLUDE  BRCC Update o Project Evaluation protocol for RAM funds o Review updated FERC Boundaries (?)  Walk through Debrief of the Recreation Season  Discuss Projects / Allocations for new Purchases, etc. o Monitoring / feedback on programs, dispersed sites o Upgrading of boat ramps o Other resource impacts o Prioritize projects, strategize accordingly  Update on Water Safety  A look at the 2013 implementation schedule  Evaluate Meeting A brief LEP Meeting will follow. HANDOUTS  June 19, 2012 RRG Meeting Agenda  Draft Information Packet for LEOs / FPOs Baker River Hydroelectric Project Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027 Final 6/19/2012 Notes, Page 4 of 4  