Final LEP Meeting Notes February 19, 2013 / 12:30 p.m. – 3:00 p.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA  Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013 12:30 – 3:00 pm  DRAFT MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Mason Stafford (Whatcom Co. Sheriff’s Office); Sgt. Rich Phillips (WDFW); Pam Garland, Elizabeth Dubreuil, and Rick Blanton (PSE); Capt. Kim Kinville, Ann Dunphy, and Carol Gladsjo (USFS); and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and note taker, (PDSA Consulting) NEXT LEP MEETING DATES     June 27, 2013 Cultural Resource Training at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington from 8:00 – 4:00.  Note: Space is limited, RSVP to Pam by the end of March to reserve spots for your organization. Oct. 15, 2013 (RRG and LEP) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington.  ACTION ITEMS  All Plan to attend the Cultural Resources Training here from 8-4:00 on June 27. Invite LEOs and also people from your organizations who interact a lot with the public.  All Let Pam know by March 29 how many training spots to reserve for your organization.  Ann Remind folks that there are speed limits at all the campgrounds.  All Call WDFW to report any bear sightings.  Rich Check with Creel Samples staff for creel / parking lot / trailer counts and send to Ann.  Rich Investigate fast tracking the contract process with PSE and USFS. Get contact name to Carol and Pam.  All Send pre-proposal info to Pam by end of January, 2013  All Come prepared to discuss pre-proposals for LE funding. For FS LE funds, their recreational articles are for campgrounds, dispersed recreational areas, and recreation on the lake. Carol encouraged all to demonstrate this nexus in their proposals.  All Continue to let Baker Project Operator know of any serious injuries or significant incidents. Phone or email is fine. He will inform Pam and she can inform FERC as required. ANNOUNCEMENTS Mason reported that Jeff is recovering from major back surgery and is not up for visitors. Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 4   At our last meeting we asked WDFW to consider delaying the formal start of the fishing season until after the Fourth of July. Rich reported this has been requested. The sockeye run size is estimated to be 1/3 less than last year. At this point, WDFW anticipated opening the fishing season July 16, 2013. REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES The finalized meeting notes from our last meeting on October 16, 2012 have been posted to the PSE website at http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx. 2012 SEASON PSE: Pam reported they spent $24,941K. WDFW was $14.6k and Whatcom County was funded $10.3k. USFS: Carol reported they spent $56K and had budgeted for $76K. They didn’t see as much OT as was budgeted. Jeremy didn’t charge to the license article. He will charge to it this coming season. Whatcom County patrol emphasis has been around holidays. WDFW emphasis included early mornings to accommodate sockeye fishermen Ann walked us through the 2012 LE coverage over the peak months. Note: The 4th of July falls on a Thursday this year, so there should be more people compared to last year. Fishing season last year started July 1. It will be July 16 this year. The USFS spent a lot more Sundays on OT than they had anticipated. WDFW was there early mornings every weekend. USFS staff didn’t arrive until later in the day on weekends. 2013 PLANNING We agreed to continue with basically the same schedule and coverage as used last year with the following changes: USFS will shift some OT Sunday coverage to mid-week coverage. Kim will follow up on this. Tuesdays and Wednesdays are the lightest in terms of coverage. Last year there were 130 hrs of base for WDFW. Rich will add more patrols for the last 2 weeks of July and first 2 weeks of August. USFS will add more hours to OT shifts. We will schedule 50 more hours of OT for WDFW and also for Whatcom County. The extra attention WDFW provided for dispersed campsites last year was really helpful. We want this to continue and agreed it doesn’t make sense to patrol so early in the morning that it means waking campers. Lake Shannon: The FSC is complete. Construction of the day-use developed site will begin in early 2016. The lay-down area is going to be partially restored along the shore. Pam is planning to set up some fencing to protect the lay-down area from the public. The quarry road will be repaired and the other road is maintained by the County. They generally do a thorough maintenance prior to the opening weekend of fishing. Corrina announced the Town of Concrete has 3 new deputies and a new law enforcement officer. She will send his contact info to Pam. New marijuana laws: Rich warned everyone to expect lots of questions from the public since it is no longer illegal to smoke it on State lands. The USFS is still waiting for a ruling on how to respond. They will probably proceed with business as usual. It’s still illegal on federal land. That includes the surface of the water. It’s illegal to smoke it in public. 2013 EQUIPMENT We approved all proposals for equipment for the 2013 season: WDFW: Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 4      o Body armor carrier @$500 o Night vision goggles @ $4K Whatcom Co: o Rifle plates and carrier @ $1K USFS o Rechargeable chainsaw, including charger for vehicle @ $500+ o PPE (hard hat, chaps, box) @ $200 o Winch repair @ $150 o Boat training @ $1500  Next steps: The USFS will amend each contract to include these new amounts (change the equipment line items in the annual operating plan). Rich will find the person to submit the contract to at WDFW and let Carol and Pam know. Pam and Carol will copy Rich when they send the contracts to that person. Cultural Resources on June 27 from 8:00 – 4:00 Elizabeth explained tribal members, professional archaeologists, and the State forensic anthropologist will be in attendance to help pass on their experiences in the field. There are three historic districts (buildings and structures). Metal detecting can be an issue. Elizabeth will see that this is addressed in the training. PSE monitors known sites every year. Cultural Resources Training Topics  Introduction to Cultural Resources Management o Why we preserve cultural resources o How we find them and why they are overlooked o Underwater archaeological resources o Difficulties in managing them  Review of the Law o Rules for Federal vs. State vs. private land discoveries o Federal requirements: NAGPRA, ARPA o Washington State: Strict laws around digging in archaeological sites. o Historic properties, buildings, and structures  Case Studies o Unanticipated discovery of artifacts / human remains  Crime scene vs. other TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON OCTOBER 15, 2013 Debrief of 2013 Season:  What went well  What to plan to do differently in 2014  HANDOUTS     October 16, 2012 LEP Meeting Notes June 19, 2012 Draft LEP Meeting Agenda Budget and Expenditure data from 2012 season  PARKING LOT Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 4     Presentation on management of bear complaint resolution process – triggers and how WDFW manages these – when to release on site or take out of the area, etc.  MEETING EVALUATION         Got out early  Good engagement Getting better at this Productive discussions Made decisions We had leftover food (correlation with Jeff’s absence?)  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 4 of 4    2013lep20130219.pdf en 