 Final LEP Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 / 12:30 p.m. – 3:00 p.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA Baker River Project License Implementation Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 12:30 – 3:00 pm FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) 360-661-2243 / 360-424-2912 PRESENT Sgt. Rich Phillips and John Ludwig (WDFW); Pam Garland, Tony Fuchs, Elizabeth Dubreuil, Miriam Decker, Jacob Venard, and Rick Blanton (PSE); James Griffin and Jeremy Smith (USFS); Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete), Chris Kading and Freddy Harrison (Skagit County Sheriff) and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and note taker (PDSA Consulting). James Griffin: USFS Patrol Captain 425-783-6090. Call if you have questions or want to chat. Tony Fuchs: Team lead for Terrestrial Resource Implementation Group PSE 425-462-3553 (office) or 206-276-1204 (cell). Call If you have leads on potential properties PSE might acquire. 2014 LEP MEETING DATES • February 25 (RRG in the AM and LEP in the PM) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington • October 21 (RRG in the AM and LEP in the PM) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington ACTION ITEMS • Chris Work with Rich to test satellite phones on Baker Basin. • James Follow up with Kim on status of Baker Orientation Packets. • Tony Work with Pam to get 3 keys for WDFW and 2 keys for Skagit County to ensure they have access through gates at Alder Creek and Burpee Hill properties. • All Let Tony Fuchs (see contact info above) know if you have any leads on property for sale. • Jeremy Follow up on Rich Phillips’ suggestion to purchase 2-3 trail cameras for boat launches. • Elizabeth Share feedback from LEOs on Cultural Resources training with CRAG members. ANNOUNCEMENTS • We welcomed Capt. James Griffin as Kim’s replacement as USFS Patrol Captain. • We also welcomed Jacob Venard as PSE’s new Licensing Program Manager. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 Page 1 of 5 REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES The finalized meeting notes from our last meeting on February 19, 2013 have been posted to the PSE website at http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx. LEO REVIEW Pam kicked off the review by stating the Forest Service funded 50 additional enforcement hours for both WDFW and Whatcom County. This worked out well. Lake Shannon The plan for Lake Shannon boat launch area will be to improve boat launch, provide vault-style restrooms, add day-use sites, and a picnic shelter. A preliminary site plan has been developed for this site. Construction set to begin as early as 2016 and no later than 2018, unless otherwise approved by RRG and FERC. PSE will be doing dam improvements prior to that and the best lay-down area for doing those improvements is in Lake Shannon recreation area. When asked about the future of sockeye for Lake Shannon, Tom explained PSE is releasing 5 million fry. They may go up to 11 million if the lake can support that many. PSE is monitoring lake conditions to see what it can support. WDFW REPORT Challenges: Down 33% in manpower. The FS wanted the opener to be delayed until after Fourth of July. They succeeded in delaying it until July 10. This delay was much appreciated. Smolts from two years ago were way down – only 7K adult salmon going into the lake (down a third from last year). 90% of fishery was in July. July contacts included 1,148, 56 warnings, 23 citations, and 48 boat safety inspections. WDFW officers were on the lake five days a week in the month of July. Rich notes that two years ago boat safety violations were high. This year these numbers were way down. Fish and wildlife violations went way up. There were 300-400 boats on the lake early morning on Saturdays. WDFW officers were usually on the water by 5am. WDFW worked the fishery side just as much but worked the recreational side less than last year. Results • During August WDFW contacts went way down, especially as the fishery died off. There were 460 contacts, 22 warnings, and 1 citation. • During September and October there were 101 recreational contacts (25 hours). • During April through June at Lake Shannon there were 112 contacts for 24 hours and 7 kokanee were caught. • WDFW spent 13 hours at Baker non-contract time (68 contacts) and issued 12 warnings, 2 vessel inspections, and 1 citation. • One bear was trapped and removed. • A self-proclaimed “world famous juggler” was contacted while fishing on Baker Lake. Rich reported WDFW loves being able to leave the boat up at PSE and fuel it there. They run all their patrols out of Kulshan. They conducted regular checks of all the dispersed sites. They didn’t see any sign of the Noisy Creek loon platform that went missing. They were pleased to see fewer naked people this year. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 Page 2 of 5 In summary, there were no warrants – no drugs. This was a very clean fishery this year. WDFW is very pleased with this fishery with great weather and wonderful fish up there. They expect more people up there next year. Baker has been getting people from all over the country coming to fish. You just don’t get Baker views on Lake Washington or anywhere else! No commercial outfitters were observed. WDFW will propose opening on the 10th of July again in 2014. USFS REPORT James is replacing Capt. Kim Kinville. He has been in the position for 5 weeks. They are in the midst of change for law enforcement side of the house. His door is open. He looks forward to collaborating with others. His contact information is on the first page of these notes. Jeremy reported 140 hours were allocated for FS Law enforcement time. One officer worked 145 hours. The stats distributed were underestimated due to the 01 time. In general, stats seemed to be 12 incident reports, 35 warning notices, and 21 violation notices. No. Hrs. No. Contacts Traffic / accidents 2 4 Drug Enforcement 6 10 Property 1 Rec 119.5 473 Forest Products 6.5 12 Totals 145.0 546 Other Observations • Five chainsaws were stolen from a FS shop during the winter. This was not solved. • The FS put in fire pits at Lower Sandy. Jeremy stopped a man from relocating a fire pit there. • Minor property thefts occurred such as gas cans, coolers, and a small kayak. • There were many bear sightings with no problems. One was trapped early in the year further down south. One was in the Kulshan campground visiting. • A man at north end of the lake had cut down trees to prop up a parachute they were camping underneath. • A transient man discovered up there was diagnosed with terminal cancer and wanted to spend his final days at Baker Lake. • There was a lot of blow down up there from the winter so the FS issued more wood permits than usual. • Whatcom County dealt with a drunk family, hollering obscenities as people at Kulshan. Another incident at Boulder Creek Campground was a domestic violence situation with drugs. Another domestic violence issue occurred outside of Horseshoe. A drunk man was pounding fists on his girlfriend’s car. Skagit County LOEs got this guy. • There were complaints about people on private property by Horseshoe who did not have permission to be out there. • Jeremy spent the least amount of time at Baker this season as he was dealing with 30 cars that were broken into outside of the area. They also had good veteran campground hosts who could handle a problem and had good relationships with LEOs. • Some overfishing occurred at Depression Lake, especially by Russian families. • Under federal statute marijuana is still illegal, and the State says is cannot be visible. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 Page 3 of 5 • These calls were proactively driven. The big calls were wood theft, drugs, off-road driving, and traffic. • Between Mason and Jeremy, they worked opposite shifts, sometimes overlapping or staying late depending on what was going on. Since 2007, Jeremy believes this was one of the best seasons in terms of overall coverage. Whatcom County put on extra patrols on holiday weekends. This was very helpful as it freed Jeremy up to cover the other areas in his territory. The number of calls and issues reported were really down compared to prior years. WHATCOM COUNTY Mason was not able to attend the meeting. In his report Jeremy shared Whatcom County data to the best of his knowledge. SKAGIT COUNTY Skagit County is looking forward to cooperating with others to create a safe and successful recreational season at the Baker Project. Their focus will be Lake Shannon and Project area in Concrete. FUNDING AND OTHER ISSUES Pam explained that the license calls for a funding allocation of $95k annually; $73K annually to the Forest Service and $22K to PSE (in an accumulative account) to use as agreed to be the RRG for patrols, training, equipment, etc. The focus has been enforcement patrols. We look at the funds as plan money and ask how to provide the best benefit to the project using those funds. What are the needs within the project area? How can we meet those needs? Pam expressed appreciation to Whatcom County and WDFW for timely invoicing and reports. This is a big improvement over last year. Elk crossings – this is a tough issue. If there is no commercial damage, the State doesn’t take any action. Hunting seasons will continue to expand as the herd grows. Alder Creek and Burpee Hill properties (acquisitions) are going to be opened up to tribes. Elk hunting on private property in the Baker Basin in considered illegal and WDFW will arrest them. Gates for wildlife lands have unique locks with a number of keys. It would be nice for LEOs to have their own keys. There is cell phone service at both these properties. LE IMPLEMENTATION PROPOSALS FOR 2014 • Patrol hours / schedules: Maintain or increase • Equipment needs o Satellite phone that works for WDFW patrols on Baker Lake o 2-3 trail cameras to set up on boat launches (personal use cameras @ ~$300 each o Other? CULTURAL RESOURCES TRAINING Elizabeth asked for feedback on this day-long training that was held June 27, 2013. Feedback included: • Length of the training was too long. • Needs to be more specific and driven toward the Baker Basin. • Needs to be more hands on and site specific. Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 Page 4 of 5 • Would like to see Lake Shannon also addressed (Skagit County has a patrol boat as does WDFW.). Note: The Lake Shannon fishery starts in late April. It is a totally different fishery than Baker Lake. Elizabeth thanked everyone for their feedback and will go back to the CRAG and discuss some areas that would be appropriate to share with LEOs at a future training. PSE is required to provide this training every two years. TOPICS FOR NEXT LEP MEETING ON FEBRUARY 25, 2014 • Review actual costs and hours from 2013 season • Plan for RAM Funding expenditures for 2014 season • Hours, Schedule • Equipment HANDOUTS • June 19, 2013 LEP Meeting Notes • Draft October 15, 2013 LEP Meeting Agenda • Budget and Expenditure data from 2013 season PARKING LOT • Presentation on management of bear complaint resolution process – triggers and how WDFW manages these – when to release on site or take out of the area, etc. MEETING EVALUATION • Great turnout • Missed the FS folks who were not able to attend • Welcome Skagit County! • Great season review • Loved the PowerPoint pictures of season highlights! Baker River Project Relicense FERC Project No. 2150 LEP Final Meeting Notes October 15, 2013 Page 5 of 5  