RRG Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013 / 9:00 <ad> Noon / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA 98233  Baker River Project License Implementation  Recreation Resource Group Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013, 9:00 am <ad> Noon  Team Leader: Pam Garland, PSE (pamela.garland@pse.com) Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) Website: http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx PRESENT Pam Garland, Elizabeth Dubreuil, and Haley Edwards (by phone), Ann Dunphy and Carol Gladsjo (USFS); Mason Stafford (Whatcom County Sheriff's Office), Corrina Koenig (Town of Concrete), and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and note taker (PDSA Consulting). DECISION: None today. FUTURE RRG MEETING DATES 9:00 <ad> 11:00 am on the third Tuesday of each month is a placeholder for potential meetings or conference calls. CULTURAL RESOURCES TRAINING  June 27, 2013 from 8:00-4:00 at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. Note: Space is limited, RSVP to Pam by the end of March to reserve spots for your organization. Next Scheduled In-Person Meetings:  June 18, 2013 (RRG only) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington (likely 9:30-noon). Oct. 15, 2013 (RRG and LEP) at the PSE Skagit Office in Burlington. NEW ACTION ITEMS  All Consider who should attend the May 21 BRCC Meeting as there will be a walk-through of the terms of the Settlement Agreement that would serve as a great orientation for newcomers to the process.  Ann Provide to Pam (to share with other team leaders) locations of new dispersed recreational sites so we can determine which ones are within the FERC boundary (generally 200ft above full pool) and perform surveys where required. Preferred format is Shape files. Let Pam know which GIS layers you would like PSE to post to the FTP site.  Haley Send new loon platform locations to Pam to send to R2 to get updated in GIS and printed on map. Ann Let Pam know how many maps they require by April 15. Coordinate mapping of hazard stick in the middle of the lake and also stump near one of the dispersed sited. Early April? Pam Talk with Tom about our suggested edit to the project evaluation protocol.  Baker River Project Relicense RRG Final Meeting Notes February 19, 2013  FERC Project NO. 2150 Page 1 of 6   Tom Meet with Pam to discuss applicability of construction closeout for Baker Resort (the end of a license article). Note: Both Cary and Greta felt this was appropriate.  Rich Check with fish creel staff to provide Ann with a copy of trailer counts for Baker Lake 2012 fishing season. USFS would also appreciate a summary of fishing success data (creel sample), if available.  Ann Update USFS RAM and I&E Plan and send out for all to consider in advance of the June 18 RRG meeting.  Elizabeth <ad> Invite CRAG members to attend RRG meeting on October 15 for USFS presentation of Baker Lake I&E Plan.  Pam and Ann - Work on revising the draft SA 312, Developed Recreation and Monitoring Funding plan, to meet the October submittal date or propose an alternative schedule for this plan.  ONGOING ACTION ITEMS  All In addition to the above dates, please continue to reserve the third Tuesday of each month from 9:00-11:00am for possible additional meetings or conference calls. Pam will send out an email prior to each date asking if anyone sees a need to meet.  All Let Pam know of any updates to the contact list for your organization. (A recent request was sent out to agencies from Anna Wingfield. Please send the information to her, as requested.)  Pam Continue to coordinate cross-resource group collaboration (e.g., I&E) <ad> ongoing.  REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES The draft meeting notes from our last meeting on October 16, 2012 were finalized with minor clarifying edits and have been posted to the PSE website.  HEARTFELT THANKS We expressed appreciation for the hard work, dedication, and clear thinking brought to this group from Greta Movassaghi, Jon Vanderheyden, and Cary Feldmann over the years. They all were instrumental in the relicensing process and were part of the process from the beginning. They all have retired now and we wish them well in their future endeavors.  LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION / BRCC UPDATE  PSE: After 35 years, Cary Feldmann is no longer with PSE. He has left the company to pursue other interests. Tom Flynn is handling the BRCC portion of the license. Tom reports to Paul Wetherbee, as did Cary.  USFS: When Greta retired in August, 2012, Carol took over her administrative responsibilities. Jon Vanderheyden retired in January of this year. Erin Uloth (from Alaska) is the new District Ranger and should be onboard the end of March.  WCSO: Mason Stafford reminded everyone that he and Jeff are planning to be on a two year rotation for Baker Lake patrols. Mason begins this season while Jeff begins a long, slow recovery from major back surgery. The plan is for both of them to attend these meetings as their schedules allow. Jake Hubby recently joined the WCDO and is stationed in Newhalem.  WDFW: Capt. Bill Hebner has retired from WDFW and is now working for one of the Stillaguamish Tribe. Rich Phillips will continue to be our representative to the LEP until we hear differently. Brock, who was unable to attend this meeting, is continuing with the RRG.  BRCC / LICENSE IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE At the last BRCC meeting Tom Flynn presented an updated version of the Baker Project Evaluation Protocol for Recreation Adaptive Management (RAM) funds. The Forest Service has discussed with Tom some suggested edits relative to the collection agreement. Tom asked Carol to submit to him changes in the protocol so they can be  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 2/19/2013 Notes, Page 2 of 6   discussed and approved at the next BRCC meeting May 21, 2013. The current agreement needs to be modified for the adaptive management. The remaining amount available is $138K for the RAM.  Also at the next BRCC meeting, PSE will conduct a refresher on the Settlement Agreement to help acquaint those who are new to the process with the terms of the agreement.  2013 RECREATION IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SA 301 <ad> Recreation Management Report This went out for review the end of last year. Comments are due Feb. 28 for 60-day review. This includes all of the annual reports already reviewed in July. This will be submitted to FERC as part of the 601 Report in April, 2013.  SA 302 <ad> Aesthetics Management Plan This plan was approved the end of 2010. PSE plans to initiate the nursery contract in October of 2013 and begin the plantings of screening plants in the fall of 2014.  SA 303 <ad> Baker Lake Resort Redevelopment Plan 2012 Annual Report 30-day review period: July 31, 2013.  SA 304 <ad> Baker Reservoir Recreation Water Safety Calls for Reservoir Recreation Hazard monitoring at boat access sites and swim areas in March, May, and July 2013. In May of 2013 we will evaluate swim delineation float buoys and maintain as needed; replace water safety tear sheets and maps, 2012 Annual Report 30-day review period: July 31, 2013. Note: loon platforms will be moved and should be reflected on the map.  SA 305 <ad> Lower Baker Developed Recreation Work with FSC team and Skagit County to restore FSC lay-down area; 2012 Annual Report 30-day review, July 31, 2013. The restoration work started yesterday. Will finish drawings in 2015 and construct in 2016. Pam will investigate getting chain link fence that runs along the shore to where the access road goes to the quarry to keep people out of there. People will be able to launch boats and picnic in the knoll area. The aim would be to keep them out of the lay-down area so it will be in good shape for the start of construction in early 2016.  SA 306-316: Required Funding These are USFS articles. 2012 Annual Report 30-day review, July 31, 2013; Submit SA 312, Developed Recreation Monitoring Funding Plan to FERC for approval Oct. 17, 2013.  SA 312- Developed Recreation Monitoring and Funding Plan SA 312 was drafted by PSE and sent out for formal 30-day agency review, October 2012. PSE received no comments back. Pam reminded the RRG, specifically the USFS, that SA 312 plan, or a request for an alternative schedule needs to be filed with the Commission in October 2013. Ann commented that the plan needs to consider monitoring items for a broader look at developed recreation, including boat launches and other sockeye season impacts, when measuring "site occupancy." Pam reminded the RRG that SA 312 has identified specific monitoring locations and that PSE intends to stay within the article requirements.  SA 318 <ad> Law Enforcement Plan Schedule two annual LEP meetings; develop 2013 LE Implementation Plan, establish LE contracts with agencies; provide cultural training to LE agencies, June 2013; 2012 Annual Report 20-day review, July 31, 2013.  PROJECT PRIORITIZATION / ALLOCATION DISCUSSION We reviewed the draft project evaluation process document that Tom sent out after the last BRCC meeting. In the Project Nomination section it is not clear that the groups themselves can nominate projects. We suggested adding  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 2/19/2013 Notes, Page 3 of 6   intro sentence: Members of each resource group may propose projects for funding. In addition... We worked together to come up with a structure to guide effective and consistent prioritizing of projects, within the working group. The following priority matrix illustrates our thinking. For the weighting we used H for high, M for medium, and L for low.  Weighting  Criteria  H Nexus to Project: Series of connections including physical location, social, and / or resource effect.  H Anticipated benefits vs. costs / impacts of no action or unanticipated effects; include recreational opportunity  and capacity that meets demands, resource protection, public safety, education and interpretation (across all  resources)  M Relates to Article: Supports intent, ties to RRG's mission  M Addresses things in excess of current funding limitations / what is already provided for in the specific article.  H Aligns with / meets RRG Mission / Goals (worthiness)  L Readiness for action / urgency (could tie to NEPA)  L Other funding sources / options  PSE / AGENCY UPDATES Upper Baker Dam Lighting Pam reported the new LED-type lights will be installed on the face of the dam in the near future. They will be downward facing and meet the requirements of the cultural and terrestrial guidelines. USFS Dispersed Recreation Management Plan Ann reported this is underway. They are currently working on GIS issues. Baker Lake Interpretive & Education Plan Carol reported this plan is 90% complete. Carol and Ann will present plan at June 18 RRG meeting. The CRAG members will be invited to attend. Bayview Campground These plans should be in final design by end of year with construction to begin in spring, 2014. Shoreline Erosion Control Plan Field review and revision of design is underway. Cultural / archaeological review has been done for this. PSE will begin permitting process as soon as they get concurrence from the CRAG. USFS will be reviewing the new (scaled-back) design with PSE March 5 at Forest Service Offices in Sedro-Woolley. Spawning Beach Decommissioning PSE will review plans with the USFS on Feb. 21. The CRAG has documented archaeological features associated with the beaches. The road that goes all the way to Baker Lake is to be decommissioned. Part of the road is outside of the Project Boundary. Archaeological surveys could be done for this stretch of the road separately. We may want to have a monitor out there when they are decommissioning so if something is found it could be documented. The MOA is just for the historic property being decommissioned.  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 2/19/2013 Notes, Page 4 of 6   RAM Fund The Forest Service is looking at impacts from the fishery and associated problems with the boat launch at Panorama Point and dispersed recreation sites. They are concerned there could be a lot of unmet recreational need. Their next RAM proposal is likely to be the boat launch at Panorama Point. Carol distributed a draft of other possible proposals, including bear boxes, parking for clustered sites, etc. Our Developed Recreation Monitoring Plan was pretty campground centric. With the fishery we need to monitor additional things than what were initially anticipated. Should funding for archaeological / historical sites be included here? Corrina heard from WDFW that due to a bad smolt season, the fishery is expected to be one third less this year than it was last year.  CULTURAL RESOURCES TRAINING PSE will sponsor this training on June 27 at their Skagit office. The intended audience is LEOs. The license requires this training to be offered at least every two years. All were asked to consider who from their organizations to invite to the training. There will be approximately 35 spots.  Training topics will include: Introduction to Cultural Resources Management o Why we preserve cultural resources o How we find them and why they are overlooked o Underwater archaeological resources o Difficulties in managing them Review of the Law o Rules for Federal vs. State vs. private land discoveries o Federal requirements: NAGPRA, ARPA o Washington State: Strict laws around digging in archaeological sites o Historic properties, buildings, and structures Case Studies o Unanticipated discovery of archaeological and / or human remains Crime scene Tribal o Other  MEETING EVALUATION Well Done: Technology worked well Got good consensus and discussion on the RRG prioritization criteria Adequate facilitation Good agenda and pacing of the meeting provided for sufficient discussion Chocolates are always appreciated Do Differently: Missed Brock Need low odor white board markers. It is difficult to meet the day after a holiday It is difficult to meet the day after a holiday  JUNE 18, 2013 RRG MEETING TOPICS  BRCC Update  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 2/19/2013 Notes, Page 5 of 6   o Review updated FERC Boundaries (?) Decision on USFS Proposed use of RAM Funding Review Preparedness for Season o Status of Contracts o Hazard monitoring Update on Dispersed Recreation Plan Review Draft Interpretive & Education Plan Update on Upper Baker Dam Lighting Review of 2013 Implementation Schedule Evaluate Meeting HANDOUTS  October 16, 2012 RRG Meeting Notes Draft Meeting Agenda for February 19, 2013 Draft USFS Project Proposal to use RAM funds to mitigate unanticipated impacts of the sockeye fishing season under License Article 602.  Baker River Hydroelectric Project FERC PROJECT NO. 2150-033, 027  Recreation & Aesthetics Working Group Meeting Final 2/19/2013 Notes, Page 6 of 6    2013rrg20130219.pdf en 