Final LEP Meeting Notes  February 17, 2015 / 12:30 p.m. – 3:00 p.m. / Skagit Service Center, Burlington, WA  Baker River Project License Implementation  Baker Law Enforcement Plan Meeting Final Meeting Notes February 17, 2015 12:30 – 3:00 pm  FINAL MEETING NOTES Team Leader: Tony Fuchs, PSE (tony.fuchs@pse.com) – Pam does on-site rec work and LE contracts Facilitator: Lyn Wiltse: 425-890-3613 (call if running late or if your plans to attend the meeting change) Website: http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx PRESENT Tony Fuchs, Pam Garland, and Elizabeth Dubreuil (PSE); Alan Myers and Brian Fairbanks (WDFW); Ann Dunphy, Debra Paul, Seth Greenfield, James Griffin, and Cindy Orlando (USFS); Doug Chadwick, Jeff Turner, and Mason Stafford (Whatcom County Sheriff’s Office); Corrina Hart (Town of Concrete), Freddy Harrison and Don Marlow (Skagit County Sheriff’s Office); and Lyn Wiltse, facilitator and note taker (PDSA Consulting). 2015 LEP MEETING DATES • Possible field trip in conjunction with June 16 RRG meeting to visit new properties. • October 20 (RRG in the AM and LEP in the PM) at the PSE Skagit Service Center in Burlington ACTION ITEMS • Tony Schedule a field trip of new properties on PM of June 16 for LEOs. • Tony Follow up with DNR on getting a lock to their gate. • Mason Email a Whatcom County contact list and weekly schedule (a week ahead) to Colin, Pam, Seth, Ray, Cindy, and Brian. • Pam By Feb. 20 update the contact list and send to JAMES who will review it and send it to all. • Brian Send Tony a proposal to purchase a PBT along with the pelican case, draw tubes by the end of February. • Brian Find out what the non-native invasive species boat check effort has been the last couple of years and let Tony know. • Tony Add non-native invasive species boat check to BRCC agenda. • All Let Tony know if your agency’s contracts person has changed. REVIEW OF AGENDA AND MEETING NOTES Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes February 17, 2015  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 1 of 3   The archived PSE license documents have been posted to the PSE website at http://pse.com/aboutpse/HydroLicensing/Pages/Baker-River-Licensing.aspx. STAFFING USFS: Will remain at the 300 hours. Colin or Ray will be on the ground starting after Memorial Day. Whatcom County: PSE will fund at 200 hours. Mason will shift his schedule to later evening hours for Friday and Saturday. Ray will stay with his same shift. Colin will look at extending some of his hours on Friday and Saturday as well. He will coordinate closely with Mason. Skagit County: Estimating 100 hours. PSE will fund those hours (out of their portion of the LEP Plan). They first need to get a contract in place. The scope of contracts is decided at these meetings. After Skagit County submits a proposed scope in a contract on their letterhead it goes through PSE’s Contracting Department. That scope becomes nested in the PSE Contract in concert with the PSE purchasing Dept. Then the contract will be sent to the Skagit County person (Freddy) responsible for signature. This whole process takes a couple of weeks. Carol Gladsjo’s Retirement: Cindy will fill Carol’s role in doing the work plan and expenses. KEYS If the FS needs a key to PSE’s wildlife lands gates there are two keys at the Skagit County Sheriff’s Office. COMMUNICATION The best cell coverage (Verizon) on Baker Lake is at the Swift Creek Boat Dock and Horseshoe Cove by the boat ramp. EQUIPMENT NEEDS FOR 2015 SEASON • PBT for use on WDFW boat ~$500 (will be funded by PSE) • Tahoe brush-guard for Mason’s new rig ~ $2200 (will be funded by the USFS) BUDGET UPDATE The SA calls for $73K / year (2006$) to go to the FS to do LE work. There is also $22K (2006$) for PSE to spend in support of LE. Some years they under spend. Going into 2015, PSE had a total of $34K. They currently have around $60K. Sometime we will have to balance the budget in terms of hours and equipment. In the LEP that we created collaboratively, we said we agreed to initiate efforts to have LE agencies come together to determine what priorities should be for recreation in the Baker Basin, particularly the reservoir projects. We started off with a deficit in LE hours. Since then we have created relationships and assessed needs in light of the new successful sockeye fishery. We will be building a budget of equipment needs coming forward. That’s why we have the orientation packets with the stats so we can keep track of all the issues and what types of violations are occurring. Last year there was a gap at Kulshan Campground between 11:00pm and 2am and when WDFW comes on early mornings for the sockeye fishery. USFS is looking at funding 200 hours for Whatcom Co. James wants to be fair with the funding since Colin is on board to backfill Jeremy’s position. Currently with what they are providing for service, they are over the threshold for being able to fund. In 2014, WDFW used all of their hours. The prior two years they ran a little short of using all of their hours. Tony suggested that the hours be spent in accordance with what is in the annual budget as that Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes October 21, 2014  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 2 of 3   would be sustainable. No one is comfortable with overspending into the buffer on a regular basis. ORIENTATION PACKETS These were created primarily for the OT guys (maps, contact numbers so they are oriented to the lake). The base map needs to be updated because PSE bought the C&G Forest land. The packet includes a contact list, including operation people, mileage to common places, and common names for dispersed rec sites so if you have to evacuate someone you would know where to go. DNR GATE There are multiple locks and keys out to this gate. The question is maintaining gate security and whether PSE can help in this regard. There were cameras at that gate in previous years. A new DNR lock has been put on the gate and PSE doesn’t have a key. DNR is meeting with PSE on the 25th to remove their lock and put a new PSE lock on the gate. PSE needs feedback on how to deal with DNR locks (F1-1 or F1-3). Skagit County does not have keys to this lock. WDFW and FS fire crews have keys to the DNR gate. Tony is only concerned with that gate as PSE at times has personnel and contract crews behind that gate and would like LE support available. CONTRACTS WDFW: Same contract people? Janice Jackson is still the same and there is a replacement for Jonathon. USFS: There is a Collection Agreement in place funding Whatcom Co. for 300 hours and WDFW for 200 hours. NEW FISHING RULES FOR DEPRESSION LAKE Non-native trout in Depression Lake – trout have been getting transferred into Baker Lake through the pump-back station. In order to keep non-native fish out of Baker Lake, the Aquatics group has decided to put a barrier net in Depression Lake. This will mean a change in where people can catch fish. Trout will only be planted on the west side of the net. All of Depression Lake remains open for fishing, just that there will be no fish east of the net. The non-native trout that used to make it into Baker Lake competed with the sockeye. There may be an immediate impact to all the people who like to fish there so it will be important to emphasize that doing this will help to protect the sockeye fishery. NON-INVASIVE SPECIES CHECKS We want to be intentional about protecting our lakes from these harmful critters. How frequently should we be doing these checks? All watercraft? Tony will see that this is brought up at the BRCC as it is a cross-resource issue. HANDOUTS • Final October 21, 2014 LEP Meeting Notes • Draft February 17, 2015 LEP Meeting Agenda PARKING LOT • Presentation on management of bear complaint resolution process – triggers and how WDFW manages these – when to release on site or take out of the area, etc.  Baker River Project Relicense LEP Final Meeting Notes October 21, 2014  FERC Project No. 2150 Page 3 of 3    2015-02-17_LEP_FinalNotes.pdf en 